Markforged Mark 2
Preparation, Set-up, and Operation


Safety Precautions
No PPE Required
Removal Tool is sharp
Machine moves autonomously, Pinch Hazard
Burn Hazard, Nozzles at 200°C

Printer Overview
Hotend/Nozzles
Buildplate
Touch Screen
Bed leveling knobs
Do not adjust! Owners only!
Fibre Spool
print volume is 320 x 132 x 154 mm 

Printer Overview
Hotend/Nozzle
Plastic Extruder
Fibre Extruder

Printer Overview
Power Switch
5
Plastic storage box

Not damaging the printer

Don’t drop the bed
Don’t use any tools on the bed other than the removal tool


Don’t touch the fibre spool, it can unravel!!!
Limit exposure of the filament to air as it is moisture sensitive.  
Removal tool

Not damaging the printer

Don’t level the bed
Notify the owners (via email) instead
leave a note on machine
Avoid touching the build plate
Residue reduces adhesion for first layer
Only use the purple gluestick
super thin layer where print will happen is sufficient
Only clean bed with water
Only damp/dry paper towels
do not use solvents or wonder wipes
Glue turns purple when wet
Use paper towel to clean nozzles
use metal brush to clean printer nozzles if paper towel is not enough
The only gluesticks permitted.

Limits of the BETA training
Plastic and fibre only to be changed by maintainersLoading and unloading is proving to be more tricky than with the Ultimakers and we need to determine how to best do it.
Until training is in place for filament change, there is no need to ever open the filament box. Please keep it shut to keep the filament quality high for all of us.

Starting Your Print
Log into eiger.io with your account
Upload and slice your model
Send to print queue
Go to printer and check bed is free
Select your print job from the queue with the touch screen
Note: If you create an eiger.io account before your practical you won’t be able to use that e-mail address for the eiger.io account with access to the Makespace printer. You need to be invited into the Makespace organisation. This will happen during the practical. See the slides about the practical for more information.

Finishing Your Print
To remove print
Let the print cool, so it is cool enough to touch and won’t deform during removal.
Lift out the bed
Use dedicated tool for removal
Return bed
Mark bed as free by pressing “Clear Bed” on the touchscreen
Pay for your print
Caution: The removal tool has a sharp edge, always scrape away from yourself.

Paying for your print
Read the volume of material used from Eiger
Plastic and Fibre are paid for separately
Payment is via the pay stations, the MF materials are listed under the 3D Printers tab
The material cost also covers wear on the nozzles and tubes as the materials are abrasive so these parts wear more quickly and are considered a consumable 
Cost estimate on eiger.io will be lower than MS as it doesn’t take consumables into account!
