Formlab Form 3B
Preparation, Set-up, and Operation


Safety Precautions
Gloves required: Resin may cause skin irritation or an allergic skin reaction.
ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARD: Uncured photopolymer resin is hazardous to aquatic life.
WARNING: The laser beam is harmful to the eyes. Avoid direct contact.
DANGER: Isopropyl alcohol is a flammable chemical.

Fire Safety
DANGER: Isopropyl alcohol isa flammable chemical. Vapour can build up and cause a fire
In case of fire use:
Fire blanket
Carbon dioxide extinguisher

Water spray is not recommended in case fire is caused by an electrical fault

Printer Overview
Print volume is 14.5 × 14.5 × 18.5 cm
Resin Cartridge
Status light
Cover
Build Platform
Resin Tank
Touchscreen
Status light
Leveling disc

General workflow
Print: Prepare the FORM file in PreForm, upload and start the print, and then monitor the print progress on Dashboard.
Wash: Use Form Wash or the Finish Kit to rinse the remaining liquid resin from printed parts’ surfaces.
Dry: Allow isopropyl alcohol (IPA) to fully evaporate after washing.
(Optional) Cure to improve hardness of print

1.
2.
3.
4.

Not damaging the printer

Don’t drop or scratch the resin tank
Don’t use any (sharp) tools on the build platform other than the removal tool
Only use removal tool
Very sensitive film. Do not touch!

Resin Safety
 Resin areas:
Cartridge release opening and valve
Build plate and print will be covered in resin
Tank is filled with resin
Always wear gloves when you might touch resin or IPA
Swap to clean gloves when they become contaminated
Immediately clean up any spills
Report any spills inside the printer to the maintainers (trouble ticket)
 

Before printing: leveling printer
If necessary, the touch screen prompts use of the leveling disc. 
Follow the on-screen instructions to adjust the feet under the printer.
Insert the round leveling disc under the designated corner. Push until the leveling disc clicks onto the foot.
Rotate the tool clockwise to raise and counter-clockwise to lower the height of the printer.
Adjust the feet until the touch screen indicates the printer is level.

Preparing to print
If you need to change the materials, there are multiple steps. Right now clear and jewelry wax resins are available.

When you change the resin cartridge, it is important that you also change the resin tank to ensure they stay paired and materials do not become contaminated.



When you remove the tank, make sure it goes into its own labelled box in the cupboard under the printer.
ALWAYS CHANGE BOTH RESIN CARTRIDGE AND TANK

Preparing to Print
Check the printer’s materials inventory to ensure you have enough resin for your print
Change the cartridge and tank if necessary.

Caution: The resin tank is paired with the resin cartridge. ALWAYS CHANGE BOTH!

Removing a cartridge
Close the printer cover.
The resin cartridge is located at the back of the printer and can be accessed from the top.
Close the vent cap on the top-right corner of the cartridge.
Pull the cartridge straight up and clear the printer body. The carry handle is at the top-centre of the back edge of the cartridge.
Make sure the cartridge is clean and place it in the rack in the back of the cupboard under the printer.


Inserting a cartridge
Close the printer cover.
Shake the cartridge before each print to ensure the resin is mixed thoroughly.
If the cartridge is new, remove the orange protective valve cover from the bottom of the cartridge. 
Push down on the cartridge handle until the top of the cartridge is level with the printer. A sensor detects the resin cartridge, and the status light illuminates.
Press open the vent cap, so that the resin tank fills correctly.


Resin tank removal
Remove the build platform to avoid dripping resin in the printer
Hold the side walls of the resin tank.
Gently pull the resin tank away from the printer (A.) and then move upward (B.)
Place removed tank in its labelled storage box
Ensure lid is secure
Store boxed tank in cupboard under the printer
A. Pull
B. Lift

Resin tank insertion
Resin tank needs to connect to contacts in order to be used (green arrow)
Resin tank spout for dripping resins should slot into designed slot (red arrow)
Avoid contaminating the underside of the resin tank with fingerprints or liquid resin.

Inserting build platform
Raise the platform lock.
Align the build platform with the platform carrier.
Push the build platform onto the platform carrier. A sensor detects the build platform, and the status light illuminates.
Lower the platform lock to secure the build platform.


Starting Your Print
Install PreForm software from https://formlabs.com/uk/software/
Upload your model
(Auto)orientate model
(Auto)generate supports
(Optional) Replace cartridge and resin tank. Shake cartridge before
Send to print queue using the app
Confirm job on the printer screen
Step 4
Step 6
You do not have to supervise printing but leaving contact details is advised in case other members want to inform you about issues with printer e.g. tank not being filled

Formlabs dashboard
Information such as name, email, print render and print history is recorded by Formlabs dashboard and is shared with other users
You can see if the printer is currently used and expected print completion time from home
Caution: Please start print only when you are at the MakeSpace - it is necessary to check that the printer is empty, in a right condition and resin is well-mixed

Finishing Your Print
To remove print:
Let the print drip - the cleaner it is, the more resin we can reuse
Take out build platform and slot into wash station
Insert build platform into holder 
Use dedicated tool for removal
Return build platform to storage(do not reinsert in printer)
Pay for your print
Caution: The removal tool has a sharp edge, always scrape away from yourself.

Finishing Your Print: Washing and Curing

Here’s a quick video on the process of finishing your print using the automated washing and curing stations:

https://youtu.be/xf9oBcTzMFo?t=205


Caution: ALWAYS use gloves when handling unprocessed prints, and change your gloves if you touch the resin
Do not leave the wash station unattended while your print is washed so isopropanol is not left open to the air
 
 
Turn on extractor fan above the printer when using wash station. This reduces isopropyl alcohol vapor concentration in the space
 

If you find other members’ completed prints:
If you want to use the printer, make sure the print is complete
Put existing print into wash station and set correct wash time
You are responsible for completing washing cycle
Only remove prints from build platform if no empty build platform is available

Cleaning After a Failed Print
A failed print may leave small, partially-cured pieces of resin floating in the tank or hard cured resin stuck to the film in the base of the tank. Inspect the tank after every print. Remove debris after a failed print.

Sharp and metal tools can damage the film in the resin tank and affect print quality. Do not use sharp or metal tools in the resin tank. Use only the tank tool to clean the inside of the resin tank.
If in doubt, contact printer maintainers for assistance - cleaning spilled resin in printer or replacing tanks. Same applies if you find printer in bad condition.
Tank tool

Paying for your print
Read the volume of material used from preForm
Payment is via the pay stations, the Form3 materials are listed under the 3D Printers tab
The material cost also covers other consumables like limited lifetime of resin tanks and IPA for wash station
Expect upwards of 5x print cost compared to Ultimakers.

Maintainer only operations
Introduction of new resins
Introduction of new tanks
raise a trouble ticket if the printer warns that a tank is near its end of life
You are not permitted to bring in your own resin cartridges or tanks
Changing any settings on the printer

Raise a trouble ticket if you think settings should be changed
Reach out via email if you are interested in resins we don’t have

Preparation for practical
Install preForm in your laptop or other accessible device
Decide what email you want to use
Optional: prepare a model you want to print using preForm before practical
 

If you want to get a general feel how to use the printer, watch this:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=45wbtu8ZHD8

