Equipment Training
Slicing
Slide 1 of 16

Slicing a model
Slicer turns 3D model into layer by layer instructions for printer
STL file goes into slicer, gcode goes into printer via SDCARD
Use Cura (free, all OS, made by Ultimaker company)
Make sure to select Ultimaker 2+ or Ultimaker 2+ Extended
Only makes a difference if your model needs the height of the Extended
Slice on your computer or makespace computer
Model file needs to be STL or 3dm
All 3d software should be able to export STL files
Simple example STL files on makespace computer
Or visit Thingyverse for files
2

Slicing a model
3

Slicing a model
Import file
Position, Rotate, Scale as you please
Select Material (ABS or PLA)
Select Preset
Trade layer height for speed
Smaller layers = better details and smoother curved surfaces vertically
Enable supports if you have:
Long bridges
Overhangs > 45°
Bed Adhesion
Brim helps with bed adhesion, prevents warping of lower layers (good default choice)
Skirt helps prime the nozzle if you don’t use a brim
Third option useless in nearly all cases (ask internet)
4

Slicing Setting
Layer Height
Infill
Boundary Thickness
5

Sanity Check
Duration reasonable for you?
Correct material?
Correct Printer? Nozzle set to 0.4mm?
Does my model need the height of the extended Ultimaker?
If so, only print with extended Ultimaker ^^
Then insert an SDCARD and export to it.
It reduces filename confusion if you empty the card before exporting to it.
Card should contain a file ending in .gcode after exporting to it.
6

Equipment Training
Printing
Slide 7 of 16

Pre-flight check of machine
Is the nozzle clean?
If not: clean during filament change with paper towel
On ABS printers: use metal brush
Is the bowden tube fully inserted?
If not: remove filament, remove blue clip, fully insert tube, reattach blue clip
On ABS printers only:
Clean up/apply glue stick (only if you are having problems with bed adhesion)
8

Loading Filament
Switch on printer
Change Material
Nozzle heats up, then extruder motor reverses quickly trying to remove filament
Ready > Select Material
On PLA printers: select between TPU and PLA
On ABS printers: two bed temperatures can be selected 80° and  100°80° is default, 100° is recommended as it improves bed adhesion
Extruder starts trying to slowly feed material
Prep Filament
Check label (correct material for printer/printfile?)
Check for gauging approx 40cm from end
Snip end of filament to a shallow angle to ease insertion into hotend
9

Correct spool orientation
Incorrect spool orientation leads to bend in filament
Loading Filament
Hang spool on rear(check orientation)Filament should unroll from bottom of spool.

10

Loading Filament
Insert filament
Wait for filament to show between 5mm and 20mm > press Ready
If you forget and filament is showing more that 20mm > Cancel and restart process
Extrude moves filament rapidly towards and slowly into hotend
We don’t want it jamming quickly into hotend. That is why max 20mm can show before hitting Read
Wait for clean extrusion (in color of loaded filament) before clicking OKLeftovers in nozzle will slowly blend into currently loaded colour.
5-20mm
11

Printing
Return > Print
Select file
Sanity check: print time, material
Print
Write your name and contact on the whiteboard in front of the machine
Watch at least the first layer go down in full before leaving the space
Only one printer per member at a time.
Keep prints SFW(safe for work). No weapons. No Sextoys.
12

Pausing and Aborting
Tune > Abort

You won’t be able to restart an aborted print!
13

Removing the Print
After completed print you can
turn off printer
Or start removal of filament(via Change Material)
Let print cool for a few minutes before removing
Avoids damaging soft print
Makes removal easier
Only use plastic or dedicated removal tool
Try tapping first layer from side
14

Final Steps
Remove filament and return to box
Weigh and pay for print
Including support material
Including failed prints
Switch off printer
Don’t leave printer on after removing filament!Nozzle will needlessly heat, damaging it.
15

Caring for other peoples prints
Feel free to remove completed prints of other members
Feel free to abort obviously failed prints of other members
Don’t throw away, put in failed prints box. They need to weigh and pay.
If you can/want try contacting member. Ask if you should restart the print.
Write your name and contact details (if you want) in front of printer
16
