What Makespace has
Makespace has 2 Bowens Esprit Gemini GM300 flash units in the studio. These are also known as Mono-bloc flashes or strobes.  They produce a very short, very intense flash of light and must be synchronised with your camera.





To use these, your camera will need a “Hot-Shoe” and have a Manual (M) exposure mode. It is NOT possible to use the studio flashes with a mobile phone.
They cannot be used with a mobile phone camera and effective usage requires practice.

Preparation – before you get to the studio
Before trying to use the studio flashes
Determine the “flash sync speed” of your camera
Google “{camera model} Flash Sync Speed”. It will be something like 1/160, 1/200, 1/250ths. For the Makespace Panasonic GH5 this is 1/250ths
Familiarise yourself with Manual (“M”) exposure mode and how to adjust exposure using the histogram.
See: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NDrcoZHB-xc

Preparing the flash
Mount the flash units where you want them with any required modifiers (umbrellas, softboxes etc.) attached.
The Flash unit needs mains power - plug it in! 
The Neewer CT-16 flash trigger receiver needs to be plugged into the “sync” socket on the back of ONE flash then switch it on (switch on side).
Only now do you turn on the flash unit. DO NOT plug the trigger in when the flash is powered up
You may see a light – this is the “modelling lamp” and is NOT the photographic flash – it merely enables you to orient the flash at your subject. Adjust using the “Lamp” controls.


Check it works
Take the trigger (without putting it on your camera) and press the “Test” button on the top
If all is well the Flash will fire
If not, check
Dip switches on trigger and receiver are in the same positions
Power to the flash (display should be illuminated)
Receiver is plugged in
Receiver is turned on

If all this still fails, batteries are probably flat (someone left to receiver ON). So, change the AAAs in  the receiver and retest. 
If it still fails – raise a Trouble ticket.


Set up your camera
Mount the trigger on the hot-shoe of your camera – DO NOT over tighten the thumb wheel – it doesn’t need to be tight.
Turn on and set Manual (M) mode, ISO ca. 100-200, flash sync speed and mid range aperture f6-8.
Set the power on the flash unit at 3-4
Take a test shot to make sure everything works.

Adding a second Flash unit (if required)
To add the second flash unit simply plug in and turn on the “cell” switch to put it into “Slave” mode (triggered by the flash from the first unit) – no receiver is required.
Make sure the flash from the first unit falls on the second
Take a test shot and ensure both units fire.
If the second unit does not fire check power and cell settings.


Adjust your exposure
Takes a test shot and review the histogram
Adjust either flash power or aperture until your have a correctly exposed image depending on what you are shooting.

Good luck

Any questions ask Photo_Video-owners@makespace.org
