Introduction to Safety

Makespace provides a unique environment where members can use equipment to experiment and make things. We all need to work together to ensure that no one gets hurt whilst we are working on our projects. So, we have rules for using the equipment, which we all need to follow for everyone’s protection. 

Makespace has a high standard of safety, similar to that you would experience at work, to ensure we can all use the equipment together. Even if you have considerable experience, at home or at work, of using a certain piece of equipment or machine, please ensure you comply with Makespace’s procedures. It enables us to provide the facility to use the equipment in the first place. 

The standards we adhere to have helped us avoid any significant injuries to date. 

BioMakespace (BMS) is the biology lab of Makespace. Therefore, BMS has similar safety procedures to Makespace, but also uses extra procedures related to biology work.
BMS is classified as RED equipment. This means Makespace members need to pass both online training and a practical course before they can access and work in the labs.
Safety training part I - general: All members have to pass part I.
This training allows members to attend workshops, clubs & teaching sessions in BMS; and work in the Maker lab (for this area, there are also specific equipment training requirements) 
Safety training part II - working: For members who want to work on a project. You will also need to pass the Autoclave online and practical training and other red equipment in the labs. To work on your own project, you need to submit a project proposal.
BioMakespace Safety Training
 

Safety Training Part II
You are currently taking ‘Safety Training Part II’. 

You must have already completed ‘Safety Training Part I’ in order to progress onto Part II. There is a mixture of new content and refresher training in Part II, to ensure you retain all the information you need to operate safely.

Part II is designed for members who want to join a project team that carries out experiments in the biolabs, or propose their own project. You also need to complete the autoclave online training and any equipment training required for your specific project.When you have passed all required online training, book a practical assessment by contacting training@makespace.org.

Training process: Where you are now

See the BioMakespace, meet committee member - mandatory.
See the Makespace, meet guide - mandatory.
Makespace Induction - mandatory, you are now a Makespace member.
BioMakespace Safety Training Part I - online - mandatory.
BioMakespace Safety Training Part II - online - mandatory if you want to work on a project in the biolabs (You are here!)
Autoclave training - online - mandatory if you want to work in biolabs.
Microbiological Safety Cabinet training - online - optional, only required if you want to use this equipment.
Practical assessment - in person - mandatory, to test your knowledge of safety procedures, waste management, safe use of autoclave (optionally also of the microbiological safety cabinet.)
Project proposal submission and approval from the BioMakespace Safety committee (the proposal can be submitted at any time.)




Part II Contents
The following topics will be covered in safety training part II
Who is responsible for safety at BioMakespace?
What is prohibited in BioMakespace?
Which organisms can be worked with in BioMakespace?
Biological safety 
Chemical safety
Detailed waste management procedures
Emergencies and spill response
Emergency procedures
Contacts in the University and the BioMakespace emergency number

BioMakespace Policies
All our safety policies can be found as shared documentation. You need to be aware of these policies and abide by them, which is why we’ve included the most important points in Safety Training Part I & II. Please refer to these policies in more detail as needed in your work. These policies include:
Biological Safety Policy (BMS14)
Chemical Safety Policy (BMS15)
Waste Management Policy (BMS11)
Genetically Modified Organisms Policy (BMS22)
Electrical Safety Policy (BMS10) 
Hot Work (Soldering) Safety Policy (BMS16) 
Lone Working Policy (BMS09)
Laser Safety Policy (BMS17) 
Children & Vulnerable People Safeguarding Policy (BMS13)
