Biological Safety cabinet
Introduction

What is a Biological safety cabinet (BSC)?
Safety cabinets are purpose built cabinets that include a fully enclosed ventilated workspace that protect the users from any potentially harmful specimen and protects reagents and specimens from being contaminated by unclean air from environment (and people)
They are also called biological, biohazard, microbiological safety cabinets
These units are standard in clinical and research labs all over the world
BioMakespace has a Walker class II safety cabinet
Definition of specimen: A small sample of something– cells, organism, plasma, tissue, that represents a whole, used for testing or experimentation


What do you use biological safety cabinets for?
They  allow the user to carry out experimental tasks safely and under sterile conditions
There are 3 classes of safety cabinets. The difference is what protection they provide and which organisms you can work with 

Class
Protects user from harmful agents within the cabinet
Protects reagents/specimens from contamination from environment
Protects environment from contaminants contained in the cabinet
Biosafety levels (BSL)
I
✚
−
✚
1,2,3. - low to moderate risk biological agents
II
✚
✚
✚
1,2,3 - low to moderate risk biological agents
III glovebox
✚
✚
✚
4 – high risk biological agents

How do Class II safety cabinets work
The cabinet has

A front opening with carefully maintained continuous inward airflow.
HEPA-filtered, vertical, unidirectional airflow within the work area.
HEPA-filtered exhaust air to the room or the exhaust connected to an external extract system.
.
Image from www.labogene.com
Further reading (not required for passing the quiz):More detailed descriptions of how biological safety cabinets work – check out the following website: https://www.labogene.com/Biological-Safety-Cabinets
Biomakespace Walker Safety Cabinet air flow

When to use a biological safety cabinet
When you are working with specimens and sterile reagents 

BSCs should not confused with laminar flow hood which only protect the material being worked with and are not suitable for work with infectious or toxic material.
BSCs should not be confused with conventional fume hoods that do not filter microorganisms. 
Note: the safety cabinet can not be used for harmful chemicals. When using chemicals, you need to use a fume hood with appropriate filters. Fumehoods are designed to remove chemical fumes and aerosols from the work area.





