Fire
Safety

Follow the alert and evacuation procedure (copies are on the wall in each of the labs) and dial 999 if you are sounding the alarm. Tell the services that you are calling from Biomakespace, Clifford Allbutt Building, Biomedical Campus, Addenbrooke’s Site, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0AH.
Ensure the Directors are contacted via the emergency number when safe to do so. Tel: +44 (0) 1223 927175
Manually break the fire alarm point glass. The nearest alarm points are in the Level 1 lift lobby and the Level 1 entrance by the IdeaSpace kitchen.
Alert people on Level 1 by voice.
Only attempt to extinguish the fire if it is safe to do so and you are confident in the use of the provided equipment.
 
In case of fire (general)
Action: Add the emergency number (Tel: +44 (0) 1223 927175) into your phone contacts now.


Alert those around you and manually break the fire alarm point glass. 
Nearest alarm points are in Level 1 lift lobby & outside IdeaSpace kitchen.

Evacuate immediately via the nearest signed fire exit - the Biomakespace Level 1 entrance, or the Clifford Allbutt Building basement. Gather at the assigned assembly point in the car park opposite the Clifford Allbutt Building and inform the  Fire Services of the location of the fire. 

Only attempt to extinguish the fire if you are confident in use of the provided equipment and it is safe to do so.

Contact the Fire Services directly by dialling 999. 
Await further instructions.

If you discover a fire

If the continuous fire alarm goes off

Switch off any hazardous appliances and make safe any experiments. 

Do not take personal possessions. If you are with a visitor, ensure they accompany you.

Evacuate immediately via the nearest safe fire exit - the Biomakespace Level 1 entrance, or the Clifford Allbutt Building basement. Gather at the assigned assembly point in the car park opposite the Clifford Allbutt Building.

Await further instructions.

NOTE: If you know the regular fire testing day/time of the CAB building and you hear a continuous alarm that coincides with that time and which is longer than 1 minute - proceed to switching off the hazardous applications and follow the instructions to evacuate
If you hear a continuous fire alarm:

There are Fire Blankets in the safety station in each of the labs. 
Water
CO2
Wood, Paper, Textiles
 YES
NO
Electrical
NO
YES
Flammable liquids
NO
YES
Other
Do not hold the extinguisher’s horn in use
Fire safety: extinguishers

Evacuation at Biomakespace is carried out according to the ”vest model”, where people who feel able to take control of the situation automatically do so. We do not have fire wardens or emergency appointed persons on site at all times so all members undergo basic training in this role.
Hi-vis vests and clipboards are stored in the document holder on the back of the door in the large Biology lab (Room 102)

Evacuation Procedure - in case of fire

If it is safe to do so, take a hi-vis vest from the Safety Station in the Main Biology Lab and act as the Biomakespace Fire Warden, doing a brief sweep of the three lab areas. If possible, mark doors of the BioMakespace labs that have been evacuated.
If someone else has taken on this role, leave the building via the nearest signed fire exit. If you are on Level 1 these are:
Opposite the IdeaSpace kitchen. This is a glass tube lock that can be broken by the attached round hammer.
Clifford Allbutt Building basement exit. Go through the double doors by prototype/Maker Lab, turn right and keep turning right until you see the exit into the CAB car park.



Evacuation Procedure (cont.)

The assembly point is the car park in front of the Clifford Allbutt Building, just the other side of the road. 
The assembly point is signed and is by the bike racks in the car park opposite the Clifford Allbutt Building.


Evacuation Procedure - Assembly Point

At the first opportunity, report details of the fire to the Directors at  management@makespace.org 

Once evacuated:
Everyone should be already signed in via Reception (Clifford Albutt Building), so that list will be retrieved by the building fire warden or emergency services.
Take a register of Biomakespace people and inform the rescue teams on site about any missing people.
Be prepared to provide any other information to the rescue teams such as the location of the incident or contents of the labs.
Phones
Phones are available in all three of the BioMakespace rooms for making emergency calls. Please don’t use these for personal calls.



Evacuation Procedure (cont.)

Electrical
Safety

All electrical equipment will be visually inspected and PAT tested before use and on an annual basis by the Safety Officer or a delegated individual/contractor. 

A PAT testing log will be kept, and cross-referenced to the Biomakespace asset list. Please let us know if you have an electrical device that you’d like to use in the space, so it can be inspected by us before use.

Faults or problems with any electrical equipment must be reported to the Safety Officer or Directors without delay and the equipment removed from service immediately.
Electrical safety
