Pfaff industrial sewing machine 
Makespace training

Contents
Overview and use
Steps to operate the machine
Threading
Winding the bobbin
Sewing
Troubleshooting


Overview and use
Industrial sewing machine, model: Pfaff 591

Recommended for heavy duty sewing such as denim and thin-medium thickness leather. 
Works best with thicker thread, such as the Gutermann ‘Extra strong’ polyester thread. 
Can only sew a straight forward stitch (no zig zag or back stitching) of lengths 0 -5mm.
As it is currently set up, the Pfaff machine will not work well with thin thread or light fabrics, as used in standard dressmaking. Please the Janome sewing machine for this.
This training deck contains covers the basics of using the machine. Learn more on the instruction manual and at the practical session.


Caution: Needle

Operating the machine - sewing safety
Turn of the main switch before threading, changing the bobbin or needle, cleaning, etc!
Recommended to wear finger guards.



Steps to operate the machine
To sew on the machine, you will need to:

Insert a threaded bobbin (you may need to thread a bobbin)
Ensure the needle is sharp, or replace with a sharp needle suitable for the seam you are sewing
Ensure that there is sufficient oil (see oil level indicator on the right side of the machine)
Thread the top of the machine and the needle
You may need to adjust the tensions on the top and on the bobbin
Position your material under the roller foot
Turn the machine on using the bottom on the right underside of the table
Ensure that you do not have loose clothes, jewellery or hair in the way
Ensure your fingers are clear of the needle
Press the foot pedal to start sewing



Threading the needle and adjusting top tension

Removing/Inserting the bobbin case

Threading the bobbin and adjusting tension

Adjusting the stitch length

Winding the bobbin

Trouble-shooting
Skipped stitches: 
usually because the tension needs adjusting or the needle is not sharp enough. Adjusting the tension is not trivial and requires a bit of practice. Always start testing sewing a piece of scrap.
If the foot is pressing too much, you can adjust foot pressure (see manual).
Sewing speed can be controlled by:
How softly you press the pedal
Limited electronically on the machine’s settings (see manual)


For help, contact the owners


By emailing craftroom-owners@makespace.org

