Thermal Imager
Online Training

Scope
These online materials are designed to get you ready to operate the Makespace thermal imager and familarise yourself with the basic operating procedure.
No prior knowledge of how to use the thermal imager is assumed.
If you already know how to use a thermal imager, this material has been designed to get you up to speed with use of the Makespace system quickly. 
This guide covers what all thermal imager users need to know in Makespace. For those who need it, some adhoc inperson training may be available. 
Contact: electronics-owners@makespace.org 


Learning Objectives
What the thermal imager is used for
Safe use of the imager 
Image capture & export
Charging 


Thermal Imager Uses
The thermal imager is a special sort of camera used for viewing the heat given off by an object. Uses include:
Identifying short circuits by looking for hotspots, or parts of a circuit that are not working properly (cold areas). 
Measuring the operating temperature of electronic components or other objects. 
Identifying parts of machinery that need lubrication since those with too much friction will appear warm.
The resolution of the imager is 320 × 240 pixels and it can measure temperatures from minus 20°C to 650°C in two ranges. 

Safety Risks & Mitigation
Risks
Mitigation
Electrical Shock / Fire / Burns - Due to damaged cabling, faulty equipment, poor earthing etc.





Equipment should be visually inspected before use to check for faults including: loose / missing / damaged parts on the unit and, damaged cabling and plugs. 
Faults should be reported with the Trouble Ticket form (on the Equipment page). Dangerous faults should be reported to the group and Management and the item labelled ‘Faulty: Do not use’. 
All electrical items should be switched off after use.
Emergency stop isolation switches (on the wall) can be used to isolate the electrical power in an emergency. 

DO NOT
Point the imager at the sun or other intense energy sources.
Force the storage box closed - the manual must be laid flat in the correct place before closing.
Touch the lens.
DO
ALWAYS use the green wrist strap - the thermal imager is a valuable item that we do not want dropped!
Read the manual if you wish to change any of the imager's settings.
Charge the thermal imager if it has run out of power.
Read up on emissivity if you require accurate temperature readings.
Dos and Don’ts 

To power the imager, press and hold the red power button for 2 seconds and wait for activation. 
Turn the rubber ring around the lens to focus.
Click the trigger to capture an image and press the tick on the touchscreen to save. Click again to return to the live view. 
Video can be recorded by holding the trigger for at least 2 seconds and then releasing. Just click the trigger to stop recording. 
Image Capture
Power button
Trigger
Turn to focus
Save option
Temperature readings of visually reflective things (e.g. shiny metal parts) may be inaccurate as these objects reflect heat and do not emit much of their own energy (low "emissivity").

Images can be viewed by removing the micro SD card (under the top rubber cover) and inserting into a computer. 
If using the imager for long periods of time, use the supplied mains adapter with USB-C cable to power it. 
Note, that plugging the imager into a laptop will not allow simultaneous charging and use of the imager; the mains adapter must be used instead.
Switch the unit off after use. 
Exporting Images & Charging 
SD card
USB port
Cover

Storage
The imager, charger and manuals should be carefully stored in the storage box after use and placed in the blue consumables cabinet. 
Do not force the box closed - the manual must be laid flat in the correct place before closing.

