Glass Flamework Safety
Makespace

Summary of Presentation
Personal Protective Equipment
Risks and Protection:
Fire
Burns
Kiln
Eyes 
Propane Canister
Respiratory

Personal Protective Equipment
For your own protection, you must:
Tie back long hair/ beards
Wear close fitting clothing (no loose, flowy garments that could catch fire)
Avoid synthetic fibres which could catch fire or melt to your skin
Wear covered shoes
Wear didymium glasses with side shields
Wear a dust mask while sweeping kiln
Synthetic clothing can melt to your skin if hot glass splinters

Fire Risks and Safety
Working with an open flame requires care to mitigate the risk of causing a fire
You must:
Not leave Hothead (torch) on unattended at any time
Make sure that Hothead is securely mounted and not pointed at flammable surfaces
Be aware of where the nearest fire extinguisher is at all times (on corner of bench), and know how to operate it
Know the makespace fire plan

Burns: Risks and protection
Burns are a risk of working with molten glass. While sometimes glass will look obviously molten (white hot or red hot) other times it is not obvious that it is hot. You must be aware of where your bead is, and do not touch the bead to any part of your body, or any object other than glasswork tools.
You must be aware:
Of where your molten glass bead/object is at all times
Of which end of your working glass cane is hot- always lay this end away from you on a cane rack or non-flammable surface
That glass can remain hot for several minutes after heating - if you are uncertain, do not touch it!
That the torch itself gets very hot- do not touch the head except the opening valve.
The handle to the bead door on the kiln can get hot
Of where mount/frame is to avoid bumping/moving Hothead accidently
To mitigate risk of burns (Other than wearing PPE (slide 3)):
Introduce cold glass at coolest part of flame to avoid heat shock and splintering
Fill metal bucket with water to quickly cool unwanted hot glass (eg. cracked beads)
Organise your work space so you never have to reach over or in front of the torch, so that hot cane ends point away from you, and so that the tool you need is close at hand

Risks: Kiln
We have a small Paragon kiln with bead door. It can be used both for Annealing and for fusing glass, however this training will only address annealing beads, and its risks. If using the kiln for fusing glass, you must do the glass fusing training.
Safety and mitigation: 
The kiln gets extremely hot, never touch any part of it when it is on except the control panel and door handle (door handle can also get hot- wear gloves if so).
Place the “kiln is on, HOT” sign on the bench when the kiln is on. While all makespace users should always assume the kiln is hot (see sign on wall), this is an extra safety precaution.
Wear a mask when cleaning kiln paper dust out of kiln

Eye Risks and protection
Eye protection is very important in lampworking, for two reasons.
Risks:
UV/ infrared can cause long term eye damage over time
Glass splintering can occur when cold glass is placed directly in hot flame
Mitigation:
Wearing didymium glasses with side shields is essential. Never use Hothead without wearing them. They have purple tinted safety lenses to block UV and sodium flare from the torch. These both reduce the risk of UV/Infrared damage and shield your eyes in the event that glass shatters or splinters. They also make it easier to see your work.



Propane Canister Risks and mitigation
The torch is fueled by a propane canister. The system is fitted with a flashback arrestor. This is an important safety equipment that makes sure that the flame from the torch never goes backwards down the hose to the fuel tank. Do not change the settings on the flash back arrestor. You should only every have to open the main gas valve and the Hothead valve.
The propane canister is stored in a yellow safety cabinet. Make sure it is closed when not in use.
Be careful not to step on or damage the gas hose.
Make sure you turn the gas off at the bottle when you are finished.

Respiratory Risks and mitigation
Glassworking involved two potential respiratory risks:
Melting glass in a flame produces gasses that can affect your health over time.
If you are working with frit, enamel or using kiln paper (which turns to powder when heated), bead release, these can be inhaled causing respiratory irritation and harm.
Mitigation:
Turn on room extractor fan
Wear a dust mask when working with powders

Know what to do in the case of a burn
Review NHS information : https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/burns-and-scalds/

