Materials for the Laser Cutters
2020-08-29

In this session
Buying and storing laser cutter material at Makespace
Which materials can/cannot be used in the Makespace laser cutters
Material suppliers

Makespace Stock

Using Makespace Stock
Makespace aims to keep a stock of laser cutter material:
3 mm acrylic, in various colours
Laser plywood, mostly 3 mm
No guarantees are made about the availability of material!
But feel free to let lasercutter@makespace.org know if stocks are running low
Material from the stock shelves must be paid for with one of the iZettles
Find the right entry in the Laser Cutter section
You can buy full or half sheets
Make a half sheet by carefully cutting a full sheet in half on the laser cutter
The scraps box contains small offcuts which are free to use

Storing Materials
If it fits, store material you have bought in your box
There are also cupboards in the corridor for storing larger sheet stock
The cupboards become cluttered, and are periodically purged
If your stock isn’t labelled, then you can’t be told that it’s happening!
Before placing anything in the cupboard, you must:
Put your full name on it
Write on the date of when you stored it
Write on the date of when you expect to use it by
Provide an email address/phone number so you can be notified before it’s thrown away!
Please don’t buy a sheet until you have a use for it!

Approved/Banned Materials

Why it matters
Toxic fumes can pose a hazard to people in the space
Some materials may have properties which make them unsuitable for cutting:
Tendency to catch fire
Excessive or hard-to-remove residue
Thick smoke which clogs the filtration system

All materials must be explicitly approved before use
A list is available on the wiki: http://wiki.makespace.org/Equipment/Laser_Cutter#Can_I_cut_it.3F

A note before going through the material list
If you are ever unsure about what materials are safe to cut, contact lasercutter@makespace.org 
or post on the makespace google group.

Approved Plastics
Acrylic/Perspex
Approved and is part of Makespace purchasable stock.
Easy to cut and relatively cheap.
Brittle, so may not be suitable for mechanical parts

White Delrin/Acetyl
A bit harder but still safe to cut.
Not stocked by Makespace
Go slow and make sure filters are working properly. 
Much stronger so therefore can be used for gears, pulleys etc.
A bit more expensive

Polypropylene
Safe to cut. Go slow and please clean the bed thoroughly afterwards.
Not stocked at Makespace
Makespace lasers can cut up to 2 mm, your mileage may vary using thicker material.
Slight fire risk. Please make sure to consult Laser Cutter Safety course content.
The cut quality isn’t great.
Mechanically and financially similar to Acetyl.


Tentative Plastics
Silicone
It has been tried with very limited success
A millimetre or two perhaps, anything else chars and doesn't cut.

GPPS / Polystyrene / HIPS
In thin solid sheet form: maybe
Ask owner to help. NO FOAM (it's highly flammable) - see next slide


?

Banned Plastics
PVC/Vinyl
Banned
Produces chlorine when cut.
Coloured/Black Delrin/Acetal
Banned
Colouring can be toxic
Teflon and Nylon
Banned
Produce toxic fumes when cut.
Polythene/polyethylene
Banned
Consult an owner
Lexan/Polycarbonate
Banned
Consult an owner
Foam
Foams can be flammable (even if the bulk material is safe to cut)

Approved Natural Materials
All solid woods
Absolutely.
All wood’s all cut/etch differently so check your power and speed first.
This can happen even within the same piece of wood.
For example, tree rings are different in terms of their hardness.
Plywood: 
Yes if it is "laser ply".
This is stocked by Makespace
Untreated Leather
Yes, but please ensure it is not treated 
Stains/waxes/preservatives can contain unknown chemicals which could be vaporised and become a health and safety risk.
Paper, Cardboard, Card Stock, Tissue
Yes these are all possible.
Fire risk is high if the incorrect settings are used.
Low power and high speed is recommended to avoid this.
Be on alert and ensure you remind yourself of the Laser Cutter Safety course content.
Stone/Slate
Yes. Only possible to engrave and even then may not be visible
Uneven surface may make focussing the laser difficult, resulting in poor quality engraving.


Tentative Natural Materials
Cork
Yes, but the edge will likely have a badly charred effect
It also won't cut very deeply
An option would be to lightly cut your design, mirrored on the back of your workpiece as a template. Then use a scalpel to finish the cut by hand.
?

Banned Natural Materials
Regular Plywood
Banned.
The plywood supplied by B&Q, Wickes, Homebase etc uses potentially toxic glue to laminate the wood together.
Additionally the gluing quality will be poor (thick and uneven layers). Making it very inconsistent to cut.

MDF
Banned
Unfortunately it clogs up the air filters and also smells pretty bad.
If MDF is something you are interested in, we would suggest the CNC Router

LaserMDF
There is a product known as LaserMDF, this is also banned
It still produces 50% the debris of MDF which still too much.
 
Treated Leather/Bi-cast Leather
As mentioned earlier, treated leather may release toxic chemicals when cut with a laser, often formaldehyde.
Bi-cast leather (or pu leather/bycast leather/bi-cast leather) may contain vinyl, which releases Chlorine when cut.

Tentative Other Materials
Metal
The Makespace lasers can’t cut metal at any thickness.
However it is possible to engrave them if they have anodising, oxide layer or other surface treatment.
 
Glass
It is possible to engrave but consult with a Makespace laser trainer or owner before you do
Need to go slow.
It can create glass particles so:
Let the system vent thoroughly before opening lid.
When touching the work afterwards, be careful about sharp shards and glass particles.
Please clean up afterwards, with care.
It can also spoil the mirror and lens in the laser head if hot glass particles get deposited on them.

?

Banned Other Materials
Fiberglass
Banned.
This is bound together with unknown resins so may release toxic fumes if cut.
Carbon Fibre
Banned
Similar to fibreglass, unknown composition.


Anything not explicitly mentioned is banned until approved by lasercutter@makespace.org!
This is important to keep everyone safe and the machines in good working order ☺

Material Suppliers

Suggestions for buying materials
Makespace buys from Kitronik - https://kitronik.co.uk/
Engineering Design & Plastics in Cherry Hinton - https://www.edplastics.co.uk/
Large selection of coloured acrylic
Often have cheap offcuts
Local, located on Cherry Hinton High Street

Know what you’re buying!
Stick to the approved materials
For anything new, send an MSDS to lasercutter@makespace.org to get approval
