Laser Operation
2020-08-30

In this session
Preparing the laser cutter
Setting up your job
Running your job
What to do in case of fire
Cleaning the laser cutter
Common issues and solutions

Machine Overview

The Laser Cutters and their Support Systems
Block diagram of the laser cutter, chiller, extraction, PC etc
Air Extractor
(in trove)
Water Chiller
20.1
*Note: The laser beam is invisible
Compressor
(in trove)

General Points
The laser cutter has delicate optics which must be clean and well aligned
Any impacts can cause misalignments, taking the machine out of action
Any dirt/debris/residue on the optics will impact the operation of the laser
Please be careful and gentle when working in or near the machine!
All three elements (laser cutter, water chiller, air extractor) must be working properly in order to use the machine
If you are ever unsure, ask for help!
Many, many members are inducted on the laser cutter, so there’s a good chance someone around will be able to help
Any problems, contact lasercutter@makespace.org 

The Lid
The lids on the laser cutters are relatively heavy, but have gas struts to help opening/closing
The strength of the gas struts can differ between the machines
Be careful when opening that the lid doesn’t jump out of your hand
Be careful when closing that the lid doesn’t slam
The lid must be fully closed for the laser to turn on
The machine will move with the lid open, but the interlocks turn off power to the laser itself
It’s recommended not to rely on this behaviour! Pause the machine before opening the lid
The plastic is tinted to filter out the laser wavelength. Looking through the lid is safe
But be aware that the burning spot can still be very bright! You may not want to stare at it.

The bed is made of slats to reduce the amount of surface area being lasered
The bed can be “flipped” to give a more flat working surface
This can be useful for materials which need more support (e.g. thin paper)
The bed is heavy and awkward, so be careful not to bash the machine
The “flatter” side of the bed gets dirtier. Clean it thoroughly before and after your job
When putting the bed back, check for offcuts of material which would prevent it from lying flat
The whole bed moves up and down, to set the laser focus 
The Bed

The Drawer
There is a drawer at the bottom of the machine, which should catch parts which fall through the bed
Please sweep out the drawer with the dustpan and brush if your job leaves a lot of pieces
You may like to do this before your job too, in case the previous person left behind pieces which are almost but not quite the same as yours, otherwise yours will be hard to find!
The drawer has no runners, and will easily fall, damaging the machine
Be careful when opening the drawer!
Keep the drawer closed when the laser is running
Pieces can bounce out of the drawer into the machine. If this happens you can remove the bed to retrieve them

The Key and Round Buttons
The key switch is used to turn on the laser, chiller and air extractor.
Simply turn it to the “on” position
There are three round buttons which are separate from the control panel:
Lighting: 	Toggles the interior lighting on and off. The light may or may not be working!
Up: 		Moves the bed up. Decreasing the space between the head and the workpiece
Down: 	Moves the bed down. Increasing the space between the head and the workpiece

The Control Panel

The Control Panel
This is the primary place you will control the laser from
It has a small screen and a set of buttons to control the laser
All of the buttons “beep” when you press them
They are quite worn out and can be hard to press
But they will always beep when they’re pressed!

The Display
In general, you don’t need to navigate the menus on the display
By default, after turning on, the machine will be in “menu” mode, and pressing the direction buttons will move around the menu
Press “Esc” to exit menu mode, and then the buttons will move the machine instead of the menu

Arrow Keys
Remember to press “Esc” to leave menu mode, or the arrow keys won’t work!
Pressing an arrow will move the laser head in that direction
Make sure there’s nothing in the machine for it to knock in to!
There are two speeds when holding the buttons down:
To begin with it will move slowly
After a couple of seconds, it will move quickly
You may find the speeds are different betweendays and machines

Datum
Remember to press “Esc” to leave menu mode, or the datum key won’t work!
The datum key will cause the laser head to return to the top-right corner
Use this to move the head out of the way when you are finished
Make sure there’s nothing in the way for the head to knock in to!


Laser
The “Laser” button will cause the laser to fire momentarily
This will put a hole in whatever is underneath the head at that moment!
Use this button with care, but it can be useful for precise alignment
Move the head to where you think you want it
Close the lid, press the laser button
Check where the hole is in the workpiece
Adjust as necessary
Remember that this may leave an undesiredhole in your work!
Shut the lid before firing the laser!

Test
The “test” button causes the head to trace the bounding box of your job
This is useful to check size and alignment of your work before starting
Make sure there is nothing in the way for the head to knock in to! 

Start/Pause
“Start/Pause” will start, or pause, the laser cutting job
You can Pause at any time, and the laser will stop
Pressing “Start/Pause” again will continue from that point
Always “Pause” before walking away from the machine for any reason:
Phone call, doorbell, toilet, snack…
Pausing will not lose your progress, as long as you don’t disturb the material in the machine


Stop
The “Stop” button aborts the laser cutting job
The laser will stop, and then move back to the starting position
This will lose your progress
Only use this if you intend to cancel the job

Prepare and Run a Job

Overview
Prepare
Power on, check equipment
Download design
Place material, position head
Set focus, fine-tune position
Run
Close lid
Press start
Look out for fire!
Finish
Clean
Turn off

Preparing a Job

Turn on and checks
Turn the key switch on the laser cutter
Wait for the extractor to fully spool up
Check the chiller state:
The top display should show a temperature (at or below room temperature)
It should not be showing an error or beeping continuously. If it is, then do not use the machine.
Check the extractor state (in the trove): We hope to have a main space read-out in the future
It should show a green LED next to a tick mark
If the orange LED is lit, next to a warning triangle, you can continue but please email lasercutter@makespace.org
If the red LED is lit, next to a cross, do not use the machine
Listen for the compressed air hiss on start-up
In case of the chiller or extractor having a problem, put a note on the laser cutter and email lasercutter@makespace.org 

Status read-outs

Download the design
Follow the steps described in the LaserCut training to download your design to the laser cutter:
Click “DownLoad”
Click “Del All”
Click “Download current”
Wait a few seconds after downloading before proceeding
Large files take some time to process
The control panel screen should show the file, “highlighted” black, probably:
LASER, unless you renamed it.

Place and position the material
Open the lid and put your material on the bed
Use the control panel to position the laser head near where you want the “blue dot” from LaserCut to be
Remember you may need to press “Esc” to enter “move mode”
If the laser cutter has a red dot indicator (currently neither machine does), its position is only approximate, and is most accurate after the focus has been set (next step)

Set the Focus
Set the vertical distance between the material and the lens using the “Up” and “Down” buttons
Using a focus tool, set the distance to the focussing tab to 41 mm
Move the focus tool away when raising the bed, to avoid bending the tab
As a rule of thumb, setting the focus to the top of the material is OK
Feel free to try and focus to the middle of the material thickness if you prefer
Gap too big
OK

“Test” and fine-tune positioning
Press the “Test” button to see the space the design will occupy
The laser head will move! Beware of trapping/collisions
“Test” always traces a rectangular bounding box, not the design itself
Fine-tune the positioning of the head and/or material

Running a Job

Pre-flight checks
Before starting cutting, you must make final checks:
Confirm the extractor status (in the trove) is OK
Check the compressor pressure (in the trove)
The larger of the pressure gauges should read somewhere in the middle (90 psi)
Check that the chiller temperature reads as 21°C or below, if not, wait a while
Check that all doors, drawers, and the lid on the laser cutter are securely closed

Press “Start/Pause”
You’re now finally ready to cut!
Press “Start/Pause” and the job will begin
Remember that you must stay at the laser cutter to watch the job
Never leave it running unattended!
You can pause the job at any time by pressing “Start/Pause” again

Fire Escalation Procedure
When cutting flammable materials, you will often see small flames. If a flame grows, or persists for more than a moment, then:
Pause the machine. The flame may go out as no more heat is added
If not, open the lid and attempt to blow it out
If the flame continues, and it is safe to do so, move the material to keep the fire away from the laser head
You can press “Stop” then “Esc” then “Datum” to move the head away from the fire, but this is probably slower
If the fire continues, you will find a CO2 fire extinguisher under the desk between the machines
If you use the fire extinguisher, or there’s any possibility of fire damage to the machine, email lasercutter@makespace.org
The Owners will check the machine and ensure the fire extinguisher is replenished


Finishing your Job
When the job is finished, the machine will let out a long beep
Wait ~30 seconds for smoke and fumes to clear from the machine
Confirm visually if possible that anything that was meant to cut all the way through actually has
If you spot that it hasn’t before you move the material or laser head, then you have a chance to do a second pass
As soon as you move the head or the material, you will not be able to re-align it for a second attempt!
Move the laser head out of the way with “Esc” then “Datum”
Retrieve the material, and any parts that fell into the drawer
Clean the bed and remember to pay for your material!

Cleaning the Bed
Laser cutting makes residue which settles all over the machine and cutting bed
When you are finished, clean the bed with the wipes provided or blue towel + cleaner
Take care not to spray cleaner onto the optics
Clean the whole bed, even if you only cut a small job
Smoke, soot and residue will have covered the whole machine
When cutting laser ply, the residue is quite staining - you may like to protect your hands with more towel or gloves
Please help keep the machine clean! 

Power Off
When you are finished, turn off the key switch
Remember to clean the bed!
Please do not shut down the PC, as they can’t be turned on again without opening the machine!

Tips and Common Problems

Laser is “fat” and not cutting
Check your focus distance
Check for scraps around the edge of the bed which prevent it from sitting level
Try a different area of the bed
The optics may be out of alignment - email lasercutter@makespace.org

Laser cuts a double line - “ghosting”
It’s likely that the optics are dirty or out of alignment
Try a different area of the bed, where the issue may be less pronounced 
Email lasercutter@makespace.org so that an owner can resolve the problem

Beeping + “Soft Stop” on control panel
This happens if the machine detects that your design doesn’t fit on the bed
Check the positioning of the laser head, make sure it has space to cut your design
Check your design on the PC to make sure there are no errant shapes far away from it
Simulation will help spot these

Parts didn’t cut all the way through
The laser tube power decreases with age. The test cards are a guide only, and may not be accurate
Density of laser ply changes across the sheet, you may find some areas cut more easily than others
If you haven’t moved the material or the head, you can run the job again to try and complete the cuts
You can remove or disable layers in LaserCut, and download the design again, to only repeat the necessary lines

Material doesn’t lay flat
There are some heavy steel weights on the stock shelves
These can be used to hold material flat
Make sure that the laser head won’t collide with them
The weights are likely to be dirty! Don’t ruin your material

Cutting doesn’t start at the “blue dot”
Make sure the “immediate” box is ticked in LaserCut
If not, tick it and re-download

Wobbly lines
Try reducing the cutting speed (and correspondingly reduce the power)
