Laser Cutter Safety
2020-08-29

In this session
How to stay safe when using the laser cutters
How to avoid damage to the machines

Primary Hazards
Fire
The laser cuts by burning materials. This represents a fire hazard
Fumes
Burning materials can release toxic chemicals into the air
Mechanical
The moving parts of the machine represent a trapping hazard
Laser
Your eyes can be easily damaged by laser radiation

Machine Safety

Safety - General
The laser cutter is a potentially dangerous piece of equipment which must only be operated by members who have received appropriate training and who take due care. The top things to always remember when using the laser cutter are:
ONLY USE THE LASER CUTTER IF YOU ARE ON THE LIST OF TRAINED USERS
NEVER LEAVE THE LASER CUTTER RUNNING UNATTENDED
KNOW WHAT TO DO IF A FIRE BREAKS OUT
NEVER CUT MATERIALS THAT YOU DON'T KNOW ARE SAFE
As a trained user, you should be very aware of the following risks and how to deal with them:


Safety - Fire	
FIRE (under normal operation) - Cutting at the wrong speed or the wrong power can result in the material igniting
You must watch the cutter at all times and be prepared to abort the job if problems occur
Small flashes of flame that don't hang around for more than a fraction of a second are acceptable, but any more is rare and not acceptable
If a fire does take, this is the process you should follow (from minor to major):
Press "pause" (the same button you started the job with) - This will turn the laser off so no more heat enters, and assuming the flame goes out, you can press "start" for the job to continue where it left off
Open the lid - With the job paused, you can open the lid to blow out the flame. Again, it is possible to re-close the lid and continue where you left off
Move the material from under the laser head assuming safe to do so (so it doesn't damage the optics; alternatively send the laser to home/datum), and smother with a spare sheet of material or blow out
Use the workshop CO2 extinguisher to extinguish the flame
You should also notify lasercutter@makespace.org if any of this happens with associated materials and settings so we can keep track of any particular materials/settings we should look at


Safety - Fumes
FUMES - The laser cutting process will release different smoke and fumes depending on the material.
Never cut PVC or a material you are not sure is safe. When PVC is heated it releases chlorine gas, this mixes with the moisture in the air and the result is hydrochloric acid which is toxic to humans and corrosive to machines.
Ensure the filter is on and the cutter lid stays closed for a while after a job to allow the fumes to clear.
If you are feeling strange, think the fume build up is too much, or for any other reason you are unsure, stop the job.


Safety - Mechanical
TRAPPING - The head and bed of the cutter can be moved by the front panel menu or programs in the machine’s memory.
Be careful when working inside the cutting area or with the lid open not to trap hands, hair, clothing or anything else.
Always check the machine for unexpected items that may have fallen in before closing the lid.
Do not attempt to climb into the machine!



Safety - The Laser
LASER BURNS/LIGHT - A 60 W laser can do real damage.
The laser should be safe within the confines of the machine, and cut-off automatically when the lid is open (although this should not be relied upon). The top window is safe to look through during a job, but do not attempt to interfere with these windows or the laser or in any way invent some way to look at the laser.
Do not tamper with the laser cutter, or any interlocks. All side panels of the laser should always be closed and locked whilst the machine is plugged in.
The red dot laser visible when the lid is open is not the cutting laser. It is low-power and only there for positioning.



Materials Safety

Air Extraction System
The Makespace laser cutters have air extractors to pull smoke and fumes out of the machine
The extractors do not capture toxic fumes
All air/gas extracted from the machine is vented into the trove
To keep everyone safe, materials which produce harmful chemicals must not be laser cut in Makespace
Specific materials which are approved/banned are covered in the next course

Materials Safety Data Sheet (MSDS)
Material suppliers should also be able to provide an MSDS
This describes the properties of the material
What it’s made of
Any safety recommendations for working with it
Combustion products
An MSDS is required for the Owners to determine if a material is safe to cut
If you want to cut a new material, you must have an MSDS for it, and it must be approved for use by the Owners
