Domino Joiner
Preparation, Set-up, and Operation


Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
Safety Glasses are required.
Non safety glasses are usually made from brittle material and may not protect you from flying shrapnel.
Hearing protection is required.
Dust is hazardous so you MUST wear a face mask, when cutting irritant woods or MDF.
Inform others in the workshop they should use PPE

Prepare space to use the Domino Joiner
Prepare a clear area in which to work
Place all of your workpieces close to hand
Prepare clamps or stops to prevent your workpiece from moving while cutting
Remove the Domino Joiner, power cord and any accessories you need from the Systainer and place them on the bench

Inspect the Domino Joiner
With the power cord disconnected:
Hold the fence handle in one hand and the body of the machine in the other, push the body towards the fence to expose the cutter.
Check that the cutter fitted is the size you need, if not then change it as described below..
Check that the cutter is not damaged and that there is no debris.
CAUTION the cutter is sharp.
Check that the plunge action is free and smooth.
Inspect the power cord to ensure that it is not damaged.
Keep the equipment owners informed if you do find a problem, as this helps Makespace keep an eye on whether the equipment is working optimally. Please fill out a trouble ticket or email maintenance@makespace.org with any concerns.
With power disconnected
Check the size
and condition
 of the cutter

Check for debris.

Machine Settings
The following settings should be checked before each set of cuts:
The size of the cutter fitted, this determines the thickness of domino which will be required.
The depth of plunge, this determines the length of domino which will be required.
The width of cut, this determines the width of the mortice which will be cut and the tightness of the joint.
The angle of the fence, which depends upon what type of joint is being cut.
The height of the fence, this determines the vertical position of the cut and is usually half the thickness of the material being joined.

Changing the Cutter
Disconnect the power cord.
Using the 8mm spanner included in the kit, gently lift the fence body release lever (do not use excessive force) and slide off the motor housing.
Press and hold the spindle lock button while loosening the cutter (turn anti-clockwise). This can be stiff and the cutter is sharp, take care.
Insert the new cutter by hand.
Hold the spindle lock and tighten with the spanner, do not over tighten.
Replace the motor body, press until the latch clicks.
Fence Body Release Lever
Spindle Lock
Cutter

Setting the Depth of Cut
In most cases the depth of cut should be half the length of domino to be used.
If one workpiece cannot accommodate this then the depth of cut on the two sides must sum to at least the length of domino.
Press in the Depth Adjust Lock.
Select the desired depth of cut (in mm) using the Depth Adjust Lever.
Release the Depth Adjust Lock. 
Depth Adjust Lock
Depth
Depth Adjust Lever

Setting the Width of Cut
The width of the slot can be increased to allow some side-to-side flexibility in positioning. This may be helpful when multiple mortices are being cut in a single piece.
Start the machine.
Turn the width dial to the desired setting, the machine MUST be running when changing the width setting.
DO NOT plunge the machine while adjusting, this can bend or break the cutter.
Stop the machine.
Standard Width
+6mm
+10mm

Setting the Fence Angle
The fence angle should be set to
0° for a mortice on the face of a piece.
90° for a mortice on the edge or end of a piece.
45° for a mortice on a mitre joint.
Loosen the Locking Lever.
Adjust the fence to the desired angle (there are detents at 22.5°, 45°, 67.5° and 90°.
Tighten the Locking Lever.
Fence
Gauge Pointer
Detent Stops
Locking Lever

Setting the Fence Height
When cutting in the edge or end of a workpiece the Fence Height determines the distance of the centre of the mortice from the reference surface. Normally this should be the centre of the piece.
Loosen the Locking Lever.
Adjust the fence to the desired height, use the Height Gauge or the Board Thickness Gauge (see next slide) to set the desired height.
Tighten the Locking Lever.
Locking Lever
Board Thickness Gauge
Height Gauge

Selecting the Correct Fence Height
The Board Thickness Gauge is just a stop which limits how far the Fence can fall, you can see that when the Board Thickness Gauge is set to 20 and the Fence is allowed to fall to it, that the Height Gauge shows 10.

The Board Thickness Gauge is just a convenience to set the Fence Height to half the thickness of a board. Use one or the other as convenient.

When using the Height Gauge you may find it easier to set the Fence Angle to 0° and rest the machine on its face plate, set the height, tighten the Locking Lever and then reset the Fence Angle.

Using the Base Support
The Base Support provides additional support when cutting into thin stock.
Set the Fence Angle to zero and stand the machine on the fence.
Fit the Base Support to the sole plate and tighten the two thumb screws. Do not over tighten.
Set the Fence Angle to 90 and place the machine against the workpiece as shown.

Work Holding
It is necessary to press firmly with the Domino Joiner against the workpiece, so the work will move unless it is held in place.
Do not attempt to hold the workpiece yourself
When the workpiece is tall and thin it is best held in a vice or clamped to the edge of the bench.
When cutting an edge joint a stop or bench dogs can be used.
The sole plate is 10mm from the centreline of the cutter. If the workpiece is less than 20mm thick it needs to overhang the edge of the bench otherwise the sole plate rests on the bench and the fence is not in contact with the reference surface, the cut will be in the wrong place.

Producing a Clean Cut
When plunging the machine use a steady smooth motion. 
Each plunge should take between 2 and 5 seconds to complete.
This will produce a clean cut.
Plunging too rapidly wears the cutter and could cause it to break, causing a safety hazard to you and others in the workshop.
16 second video demonstration

Dust Extraction
The Festool domino MUST always be used with The Festool dust extractor 
The power cord for the Domino Joiner should be plugged in to outlet on the extractor. Set the main switch on the extractor to AUTO, when the Domino is started it will start automatically. 
The connector on the dust hose fits over the extraction port on the Domino Joiner.
The power MUST be disconnected before changing the cutter.
The machine MUST be running, but the machine MUST NOT be plunged while changing the mortice width setting.
N.B. This is counter intuitive.

Power outlet
Main switch

Turning On and Off
Insert the Plug-It power cord, noting the orientation of the Keyway, and turn ¼ turn to lock.
Plug the power cord into the outlet on the extractor and set the main switch to AUTO.
Put on PPE and attach the extractor hose BEFORE starting the machine.
Push the Power Switch down and forward to turn on.
The extractor will start automatically
Press the Power Switch down to turn off.
The extractor will stop after a few seconds.

End to Face 90° Joint (e.g. rail to post joint)
Place the boards together as desired.
Draw a line along the position of the centre line of the Domino (or Dominos).
It is not necessary to use a square to draw these marks but it is easier until you are familiar with the process.
Set aside the horizontal board and turn the vertical board so the face to be cut is towards you.
Set the fence to 90°, place the joiner onto the edge of the  board, aligning the cursor with the mark.
Cut the mortice and repeat for the other board.
Dry fit to test, then glue each face and mortice and clamp.
58sec Video Demonstration
Optional clamp to ensure alignment
Mark along centreline of Domino
Mark visible
Mark aligned with cursor

Edge Joining Boards (e.g. for a Table Top)
Lay out the boards as desired.
Place a straight edge across the whole top.
Draw lines across each join and the outer edge. Mark both sides of each join with a unique letter.
Carry the mark over to the edge on each side, when trimming the finished board use the edge marks to avoid cutting into the dominos.
Set the fence to 90°, place the joiner onto the edge of the first board, aligning the cursor with the mark.
Cut the mortice and repeat for each mark.
Dry fit to test, then glue each edge and mortice and clamp, do not over tighten the clamps, the dominos will give you good alignment but do not guarantee a flat result, follow the usual guidelines for a flat panel.
Mark visible
Mark aligned with cursor

End to End Mitre Joint
Place the boards together as desired.
Draw a line along the position of the centre line of the Domino (or Dominos) on the inside of the joint.
Place the first board with the line on the top.
Set the fence to 45°, place the joiner onto the edge of the  board, aligning the cursor with the mark.
Consider reducing the Fence Height to move the Domino towards the inside of the board. This gives you a greater thickness of board to cut into.
Consider the depth of cut, be careful not to burst through the board.

End to Face Joint
Mark the position of the centre line of the domino.
Mark a perpendicular line at 90° to the centre line, crossing where the centre of the domino should be.
Mark a line parallel to the centre line offset by 10mm apart.
Align the base of the sole plate along the parallel line with the centreline scribed on the sole plate touching the perpendicular line
If the reflection of the perpendicular forms a straight line with the perpendicular itself, you know you are straight.
When starting the machine check that it does not move, press on the fence handle and adjust if necessary.
Cut the mortice in the end of the other piece as before.
Centre line of Domino
Perpendicular
Parallel offset 10mm
Centre line
Reflection of perpendicular

Sizing Tips
The hole cut is the shape of two circles joined by parallel tangents.
The centre separation of the two circles is always 15mm.
The total width of the hole is the cutter diameter (5mm cutter illustrated)
The total length of the hole is 15mm + cutter dia.
The sole plate is 10mm from the centre line of cut.
When cutting into a flat surface, mark a line parallel to the required centre line 10mm apart (Base), and a line orthogonal to the midpoint of the cut (Centre).
Align the base of the sole plate along the Base line with the centreline scribed on the sole plate touching the Centre line
Base
Centre

Resources
Festool supplemental user’s manual
Festool Demonstration Video (10½ minutes)
The following video is 38 minutes long, but covers everything you need to know to cut right angle joint types.
New Brit Workshop Video (38 minutes)
Demonstration for a corner joint begins at time 11:51
Demonstration of an end to face joint begins at time 23:26. 
Makespace Risk Assessment



Recap of the training
We have covered:
How to change the cutter
Setting the depth & width of cut and the height & angle of the fence
How to attach the base support
How to cut End to Face, Edge to Edge and Mitre joints
How to mark out a joint on a flat surface
