Thicknesser
Health and Safety

Loose Articles of Clothing
This thicknesser makes use of a constantly rotating plane like blades, as such the following items should NOT be worn when operating it to avoid trapping and/or catching.
Ties and scarves
Bracelets, necklaces and rings
Long sleeves
Gloves
Wired Headphones
Long Hair should also be tied up where possible.

Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
Ear defenders required due to noise
Eye protection required due to chips of wood and dust
Face mask potentially required depending on wood in use (e.g., yew) - but always recommended
Do not wear gloves when using the thicknesser. If caught by the machine, they can draw your hands in


Operating the thicknesser
The thicknesser works by using a set of spring-loaded rollers to push the wood past a rapidly rotating drum
NEVER put your hands near this part of the machine unless the power cable is unplugged from the mains. NEVER touch this drum or the blades or try repair a fault here!
The drum has two full width blades that  plane the top-side of the wood being cut.
If the machine stalls, disconnect from the power before attempting to clear it

Operating the thicknesser
You must be next to thicknesser at all times when operating it
Ensure there are no obstructions on either side. Ensure there is enough space for your work piece to enter and exit unobstructed
Ensure that the workshop dust extractor is connected (and on!)
Never let hands enter the machine bounds whilst power is connected
Never take more than 0.5mm per passage (¼ turn of the height adjustment crank)
Always feed the wooden pieces lengthways, not sideways
Ensure you know where the E-stops are before using this machine
Ensure the thicknesser cannot fall over in use. Seek assistance to feed and catch long pieces and secure the thicknesser by clamping it to the bench

Material suitability
Clean, natural, dry wood in plank form from a known source free of foreign objects
Do not plane workpieces shorter than 356mm or thinner than 5mm 
Only attempt to thickness one piece at a time
Do not put random logs or branches of wood through this.  Material need to be roughly flat already
No MDF, chipboard, particleboard, epoxy tables etc.
No palette wood, old bits of furniture, etc. (recycled wood may have nails and screws in it)
Minimum target thickness should be a greater than 5 mm


References


Manufacturer's Instructions
Makespace Risk Assessment  
