Tormek T4
Sharpening System
Basic Setup

Unboxing the Equipment
The Tormek and it’s parts are stored in two separate boxes within the Workshop, the Tormek wheel is not dismantled after used and can be used almost immediately after removing from the box and plugging into a power source.


Filling up the Water Trough
Take the Tormek to your workspace and attach the black water tray beneath the grinding stone. The Tormek has a dedicated jug to fill up the tray with water in order to prevent contamination from oil, this jug is kept separate from the storage box but can be found within the workshop. It is much easier to fill the tray up after attaching it in order to avoid spillages.

The Grindstone is porous and slowly absorbs water, after filling up the trough to the indicated level inside the trough, wait a couple of minutes and then add more water.

Attaching the Tool Rest
Take the Tool rest and attach it to the top of the Tormek, with the bar passing over the stone. This “F” shaped metal rest comes with a Vernier Adjuster to precisely adjust the tool rest’s height and adjust the grinding angle of your tools. The Tormek has two locations to attach the rest, one at the top and one at the front, but most tools will only require the top slots.
Next, adjust the height of the tool rest to be a couple of centimeters from the stone’s edge. Using the Vernier Adjuster and the square, adjust the tool rest so that it is 90 degrees to the stone face.
Tool Rest: 

Checking the stone is fit for use
Take the Tormek’s engineer’s square and ensure that the stone’s face is exactly 90 degrees to the stone’s edge. Ensuring that the stone is “true” is the first step to having perfectly squared and correctly sharpened tools.
At this point, you can set the stone’s surface grit level using the dressing stone. This stone looks very similar to a flat sharpening stone and has two faces, one smooth and one rough. Placing one side of the dressing stone against the grinding stone whilst running will adjust the grit; if you require a lower grit (220) then apply the dressing stone using the rougher side, use the dressing stone evenly to allow even wear and keep it perpendicular to the grinding stone’s face. The smooth side of the stone can be used to apply a higher grit (1000), useful for honing your tool once sharpened.
