Bandsaw
Introduction

What is a bandsaw?
The bandsaw is a power tool which uses a continuous band of metal with teeth along one edge to cut various workpieces. The band rides on two wheels rotating above and below the workpiece. The bandsaw provides a fast cut with more accuracy than a jigsaw, and has a much narrower kerf than the chop saw. It cuts faster (and deeper pieces) than the scroll saw, but is less able to cut curves. 

What can you make using a band saw?

What can you cut using a band saw?

Complex curves
Straight rip cut (support needed for a long board)

What can you cut using a band saw?

Cut dovetail joints (with a jig)
Cut a tenon for a mortise and tenon joint

What can you cut using a band saw?
Re-sawing a log using a jig
Cutting a veneer

What to cut with a bandsaw
Wood, MDF, plywood, plastics
Narrow cuts. Other saws remove more material.
Deep cuts. The Makespace bandsaw has a maximum theoretical of 28cm deep
Cut accurately straight either cross-grain, with the grain, or at any angle using the fences
Cut curves (several runs may be needed).



What other saws can be used instead?
Scroll saw (small pieces, better for curves but slower, less throat height)
Chop saw (better for quick + accurate 90° cuts, repetitive work, metal)
Jigsaw for complex shapes
Circular saw for long, straight cuts

Small workpieces
Very wide workpieces. Anything wider than 39cm will not fit in the machine
Tight curves, the minimum radius the standard blade can cut is 65mm (although you can take several runs to achieve a tighter radius)
Thin material below 10mm. Anything less than 3 tooth pitches will not be cut cleanly. You can fix a thin piece to a sacrificial substrate to support it
Thick material. The standard blade is only capable of clean rip cuts up to ~50mm and cross cuts of ~150mm.   
Green wood. Green wood needs a special blade with more set on the teeth. 
Email maintainers@makepsace.com if you need to cut anything outside the above limits. 
Metals, as will be explained shortly…
What the bandsaw does not cut

Why no metal?
You are not permitted to cut metal with the Makespace bandsaw:
Makespace users are mostly working with wood and plastic materials so the blade has been chosen for those materials
Wood saw teeth are more aggressive than metal saw teeth and will wear quickly if used on metal
The dust extractor ducting is full of flammable dust and we don’t want hot metal particles to be added to the mix
If you need to cut metal there are hacksaws or the chopsaw.
