Woods for Woodturning
This is an additional explanatory presentation for trained users of
the wood lathe in Makespace. It is not a required part of the
training programme.

Wood
Wood is by far the most common material turned on wood lathes.
Other materials are used such as Corian, acrylic and resin
Within ‘woods’ there are important differences relating to:
Whether it is hardwood or softwood
What particular species of wood it is
The Sustainability of the wood source
The Toxicity of the wood
Whether it is Kiln dried, Air dried or Green


Hardwood or softwood?
Hardwood comes from deciduous trees-  ie those that lose their leaves annually. 
Softwood comes from conifers, which usually remain evergreen. 
The trees from which hardwood is obtained tend to be slower growing, meaning the wood is usually denser
There are exceptions such as Balsawood which is technically a hardwood but is very soft and light
Dust from hardwoods tends to be more toxic and able to cause allergic reactions but all wood dust is hazardous

Species of wood
Lots and lots of choices
Balance between cost, availability, toxicity, colour, grain, ease of turning, finishing options as well as ones attitude to sustainability issues
The following have been seen to be reliable woods for turning
Ash, Maple, Walnut, Sycamore. Cherry, Elm, Beech, any fruitwood (and others)
Softwood is generally easily available, cheap and good to practice on but can be difficult to finish well
Species with interesting grain often lend themselves to plainer decoration
Plainer wood types can be stained or physically decorated to add interest
Oak is often available as not many turners like it and one can find large blanks easier than other woods.  It has an open grain but like cherry and others it can check and crack easily
You can glue up thin pieces of different woods for interesting effects or use plywood – see Glueups link on last slide


Sustainability
Sustainable wood comes from sustainably managed forests. Stewards manage the forests to prevent damage to eco-systems, watersheds, wildlife and the trees themselves; taking long term rather than short term view.
Deciding what wood to use is a judgement call rather than objective decision
Generally fast growing trees like Pine or Fir are more sustainable.
Complex issue – often related to the sustainability of the environment and economic impacts of the use of trees for lumber. Also detail can be important some wood thought to be sustainable can come from illegal logging operations but difficult to chase down this information for particular pieces
The EU has introduced a legal framework to protect trees and forests so wood sourced from the EU is a relatively safe choice 
Wood from Asia, Africa or South America often come with more concerns
See links on last slide for more detail



Toxicity
Only a few woods are actually toxic however many do have the capacity to cause allergic reactions
Most poisonous wood substances are found in the bark, leaves, or sap of a given wood species. 
Even with properly cured wood, there can still be residual amounts of sap, or fragments of bark, hanging around in your wood blank. 
Take extra precautions if you are turning a project that leaves the bark on such as, a natural edged bowl or vase.
Turned items from Spalted wood can be beautiful but be aware that the spalting is actually fungus and can cause lung problems.  Look out for kiln dried spalted wood as that is safer.
Check out the Wood Database link on the last slide and the book (name to check) in Makespace library as it lists all common and many uncommon woods with their particular hazard levels
Items that are designed to be used with food need careful choices (eg Ash, Beech) and also need Food Safe finishes.


and to emphasise the point ..
“The yew is similar to these other trees in general appearance . . . It is an ascertained fact that travellers’ vessels, made in Gaul of this wood, for the purpose of holding wine, have caused the death of those who used them.”
Pliny the Elder – written in 77 AD


Kiln dried, Air dried or Green
Greenwood can be kiln dried commercially, air dried or used green
The rule-of-thumb for air-drying  is to allow one year of drying time per inch of wood thickness.
Drying time for green wood can be speeded up by the following process:
Rough turning a bowl blank leaving a significant wall thickness
Storing it in a closed container or in a plastic bag with wood shavings
Replacing wood shavings every couple of weeks
You can check moisture level with a moisture meter or weigh the bowl every so often and wait until it reaches equilibrium. 
Finally the item can be remounted on the lathe to complete the turning - expect the bowl to have distorted somewhat.


Green wood (Fresh sawn or unseasoned)
If you are trained to listen out for the sound of chainsaws then this can be a very cheap way of finding wood for turning.  Some tree surgeons often see wood as waste and happy for you to carry it away.
Turning is easier than turning dried wood and can be an excellent way to practice techniques and shapes. 
The high moisture content of unseasoned wood will cause finished pieces to warp as they dry. 
Splitting is also likely if green wood is dried too quickly. 
If green wood is to be stored for a period of time, the end grain can be sealed with molten paraffin wax or a paraffin wax emulsion
When turning greenwood, the lathe, the tools and the turner can get quite wet and all will need drying at the end.

Air dried
This is green cut timber that has been stickered (ie stored in piles with spacers to allow air to circulate) and left to dry naturally in the air. 
In the UK, air-dried timber is unlikely to have moisture content lower than about 15% and it is likely to be somewhat higher than this. 
If the item is intended to be used indoors it may be worth bringing it into the house for a few weeks to acclimatise it to the  house environment before turning it - you will have a far more stable finished piece
There may well be remaining fungal spores in air dried and particularly spalted wood that have not been killed off
With time and patience, this can be a cheap way of obtaining wood blanks
End grain loses moisture more readily than side grain and without intervention can cause cracks 


Kiln dried
This is timber that has been artificially dried commercially
Its moisture content can be brought down lower than air-dried timber. 
It is an expensive way of obtaining wood
It can be harder and dustier to work


Useful Links

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WMj45f2jmcY   		Glue ups
https://www.wood-database.com/					Comprehensive database includes
											Wood finder
											Restricted and endangered woods list
											Other useful articles
https://www.treske.co.uk/sustainable-hardwoods			Guide to responsibly sourced hardwoods


