Woodworking handtools
Introduction

What are woodworking handtools
The woodworking hand tools can be used for marking, measuring, cutting, carving or planing solid timber. 
They can be used on their own or in combination with power tools 
These are traditional tools have for the most part been used for woodworking for centuries before power tools became popular in the mid 20th century






What can you make using the handtools
Tea box in english Cherry, panga panga and ebony
Bedside table in English Ash and English Oak
Makespace handtool cabinet. Made with the tools within

When to use woodworking handtools
When you want the joy of producing something completely by hand;
When you want lower levels of noise, dust and risk to yourself and others;
When a cut cannot be made safely using a power tool/machinery;
For flattening boards before passing them through the thicknesser;
After using the thicknesser to improve the finish; 
When cutting/finessing joinery;
In may other situations…too many to cover on this course 
Do not use this tools for cutting anything else than solid timber, for plastic, acrylic, man made boards such as Plywood and Mdf use the non-red handtools


What material can you cut/shape using hand tools?

The woodworking hand tools are to be used on solid timber only.
Do not use this tools with MDF, Plywood or other man made sheet materials, the glue in them blunts tools quickly and can damage blades. 
Do not use these tools to cut/shape acrylic, plastic or ceramic
Do not use these tools to cut metal 
Not all solid timbers are made the same and not all will be ideally suited for hand tool woodworking. 
As a general rule avoid exotic woods, they tend to be very hard and difficult to shape and often contain silica deposits which blunts blades quickly 
Pine/softwoods can be used with these tools, however it is often more difficult to get good results with it as a beginner. 





Which woods we recommend you use them on 
As a beginner we recommend you use of the following species, when in doubt ask other members for recommendations:
Tulipwood/poplar, the cheapest of the hardwoods and easy to work, not the most attractive figure/color but is perfect for painted finishes like milk paint
European beech, commonly available hard and dense making it a good beginner wood, however if dulls tools quickly so be prepared to sharpen often 
European and American Ash, commonly available, attractive figure, open pored wood can make finishing difficult and mistakes tend to be more visible. 
European and American Oak, probably the most common wood people associate with woodworking. Attractive figure and very durable although due to the open pore nature can be difficult to finish well. 
American Cherry, easy to work and closed grain, color darkens with age, pricey. Dark furniture is out of fashion so it is becoming less and less used 
Black Walnut, one of the most attractive woods commonly available, soft and easy to shape, dense with medium pores, It is the most expensive wood on the list. Dark furniture is out of fashion 


What other tools/equipment can be used instead?
Bandsaw (faster for long rip cuts, can be used to cut veneers)
Thicknesser (Quicker when removing large amounts of thickness)
Mitre saw (as an alternative to handsaws)
