Work-holding on the Woodturning Lathe
1

Aims of this presentation
Explore different methods by which wood can be secured in a lathe.
Consider combinations of holding methods that allow pieces to be turned and finished from both sides.
Consider advantages and disadvantages of each
Look at some Case Studies
2

Types of holding techniques


Between centres

3

Between Centres or Spindle Turning
Blank held firmly between drive centre and ‘live’ tailstock
Generally grain runs parallel to lathe bed

4

Types of holding techniques


Faceplates

5

Faceplates
Good solid and secure
Things not to do
Forget how long the screws are !
Use ‘dry wall’ screws that can snap
May need to flatten area on natural surface  or remove bark
6

Types of holding techniques


Chucks 

7

Chuck and jaws example
A commonly used chuck has four replaceable jaws
Example shown has dovetail shaped jaws, others have internal jaws straight with lip or grooves – check your own jaws
Most jaws can be expanded into a mortise or compressed onto a tenon
Unlike between centres, piece can be held by the drive end only (but often tailstock is brought up for safety)
Four jaws can hold small square stock directly
Watch out when running in reverse as chuck can unscrew
Adapters or Inserts are available to allow chucks to be used on different spindle threads
There are quick change jaws now but expensive


Chucks modern ideas – adopted following the use of chucks in metalwork.  Don’t actually need chucks (but you do) 
Need to get dovetail right – make an old scraper to suit dovetail shape
Adapters to allow chuck to fit into larger spindle size means you extend the workpiece further from the drive centre so no ideal.
can mean 
If you are in habit of turning larger pieces be aware that the mass of the workpiece and jaws can mean they continue to turn as lathe stops and can trun off.  Even more so if you are reverse turning them think of using a lockscrew.

Get right size of the tenon and mortise for max contact – if you are bowl turning with greenwood though you might want to bear in mind that as you do the second turn after blank has dried and warped you will be reducing the tenon as you get it back to round.


Contact with shoulder important 

Chucks are relatively modern – taken from metaal working but 4 rather than 3 jaws.
Scrolling chucks as all 4 move together

8

Mortise or Tenon? 
Depends on how you want to finish off the bottom and also on the grain direction
Attaching an end-grain bowl to the lathe works well  with a tenon because the tenon is compressing wood fibres. 
Expanding into a mortise can push apart and break the wood fibres on an end-grain bowl and potentially fly off the lathe.
Side walls of mortise need to be strong
Working with thin or expensive blanks can mean you don’t want to waste depth on forming a tenon or reduce internal depth with a mortise – see later

9
Mentioned earlier to avoid using mortise on end grain – as it splits apart easily but large bowls it can be better as lot of mass at the side of the crecess.  Especially if you are using a fairly small set iof jaws meaning you would only have a small tenon


9

Mortise or Tenon
Note dovetail
10
Note – not all jaws are dovetail shape.  Many have straight internal faces with lip 
Mentioned earlier to avoid using mortise on end grain – as it splits apart easily 
10

Size and shape of recess / tenon
11

Types of holding techniques
Screwchucks

12

Screwchucks
These can be secured in a normal chuck or held directly in lathe spindle



Quick and easy for small’ish pieces
Not very suitable for soft wood endgrain
For same size screwchuck need slightly smaller drill hole for softwood rather than hardwood.
Can be home made
13

Screwchucks 
14

Types of holding techniques
Wider variety of jaws for Chucks
Custom jaws
Deep jaws
Pin jaws

Cole Jaws/Longworth style chuck

15
Whole idea is to avoid the workpicece leaping out and flying off

15

Chucks and Different types of Jaws
16
Soft Jaws – for custom designs

Chucks and Different types of Jaws
17
Jaw plates - again to make customised jaws
Soft Jaws – for custom designs

Chucks and Different types of Jaws
18
Deep Gripper jaws 
Jaw plates again to make customised jaws
Soft Jaws – for custom designs

Chucks and Different types of Jaws
19
Standard? Default jaws
Deep Gripper jaws 
Jaw plates again to make customised jaws
Soft Jaws – for custom designs

Chucks and Different types of Jaws
20
Small stepped jaws
Standard? Default jaws
Deep Gripper jaws 
Jaw plates again to make customised jaws
Soft Jaws – for custom designs

Chucks and Different types of Jaws
21
Pin jaws
Small stepped jaws
Standard? Default jaws
Deep Gripper jaws 
Jaw plates again to make customised jaws
Soft Jaws – for custom designs

Cole (Button) Jaws and Longworth chucks
22
Neither Cole jaws and Longworth style are not as secure as other jaws – keep tailstock up and keep all force directed towards the head stock
Stacking Turn Studs to give extra height to the rubber buttons. These can also be used on their own without the rubber buttons. 
Cole Jaws
Longworth

Types of holding techniques

Jam chucks
23

Jam Chucks
24
Jam chucks made with scrap wood and turned to size needed. Often made as a one-off single-purpose unit, it is mounted in the lathe headstock and provides a friction-fit cavity or surface that the turning can “jam” against. The tailstock is usually brought into play at the same time for safety

Types of holding techniques


Pressure Pads
25

Pressure pads
26
Like a jam chuck but the surface is flat with a non-slip coating.  The tailstock pressure keeps the blank in place.  Not a very secure technique – slow speeds and light cuts needed.

Types of holding techniques


Vacuum Chucks
27

Vacuum Chucks
Most vacuum chucks require an expensive specialised pump, If you are mostly concerned with reversing a bowl to finish the bottom or remounting a bowl to finish the inside, the suction provided by a vacuum cleaner or shop vacuum will be sufficient. 
A rubber hose links the cleaner to a piece of brass tube which is a sliding fit in the headstock spindle. The chuck itself is mounted on a face plate and can take the form of a flat rubber disc glued on a wooden disc or a ring made of rubber tubing glued in a groove turned in a wooden disc. There is, of course a hole through the centre. 
The force holding the work against the chuck is given by the product of the vacuum (pounds per square inch or Kg/sq. m) and the area of contact (square inches or square metres). So, for a bowl 10 inches diameter the area is 78.5 sq in. and with just 2 pounds per sq in. there will be some 150 pounds force to hold the work in place. Since a vacuum cleaner shifts a large volume of air, the system does not need to be very leak-proof. 

28

Specialist mandrels
Pen Mandrel most common example.
Mandrel held between headstock and tailstock as in spindle turning
Wood blanks held between spacers in compression
29

Case Study 1 ‘Normal’ Bowl turning
Approach
Turn outside of bowl first and form a tenon or mortise (recess) to allow later reversal of bowl to turn inside.
First mount can be either using screwchuck or faceplate.  Faceplate good for larger blanks. 
Exterior formed first
Mortise (recess) or tenon formed on bottom of bowl
When outside finished bowl reversed and held by tenon or mortise 
Inside turned
If tenon used then this will need removing. 
30
30

Case Study 1 Bowl turning using Faceplate
Surface flattened
Rough cut to shape
Faceplate screwed on centrally
Tenon turned
A bowl reversed, held in tenon and hollowed.  The tenon will need removing using either Cole Jaws, Longworth chuck or jam chuck. 
31

Case Study - Thin platter – using screwchuck
Approach
Thin platters do not allow same approach as bowl because we cannot afford either to waste wood by creating tenon or to limit depth of inside of platter using recess
One solution - use sacrificial glued on tenon
Process
Use screwchuck to initially mount - reduce need for deep hole using spacers
Turn and shape tenon round and shape/finish outside and base of platter
Glue on scrap wood to use as tenon
Reverse platter and hold with tenon
Turn and shape inside
Reverse again and hold in Longworth jaws – remove sacrificial tenon


32
Can use serious and strong glue as this will be removed at end by gouge 
32

Thin platter
Check depth against thickness of blank 
Glue waste block as centrally as possible
33

Plywood Spacers
Thin platter
Nearly minimum diameter for best grip
Turn bottom of bowl and turn sacrificial tenon round
34

Thin platter
Unscrew and reverse to hold platter in chuck using ‘sacrificial’ tenon and form inside.
Reverse again into Longworth style (or Cole Jaws) (tailstock up for security). Remove tenon and finish
35

Thin Platter – complete
36

Case Study 3 Holding small blanks
Directly into normal jaws
Pin jaws
Special home made jig

37

Links
Different types of chuck
	https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qHNzZ4_yBIs
	https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qO9xi5xd5NE 
Using customisable plate jaws
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bl74JOZSyUc 
Getting right size mortice and tenon
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zCKaDSCe3Ew



38
