Tormek T4
Sharpening System
Sharpening Scissors

Scissor Sharpening Video

The Support Plate
Once you have read and followed the training section for “Basic Setup”, you can continue from here in order to sharpen scissors using the Support Plate.
The Support plate is a flat metal plate with a hole running length-ways allowing for it to be mounted onto the tool rest. Mount the plate such that the edge is pointing away from the grindstone, then use the wheel to lock it in place.
Adjust the tool rest so that the rounded edge of the plate is no more than 5mm away from the edge of the grind stone.

The Angle Master - Part 1 (video included)
Now that your Tormek is ready for use, take the “WM-200 Angle Master”. This grey plastic card has two black adjusters on it that are used to adjust the angle of your scissors.
First, observe the front of the Tormek, towards the right side is a series of numbers. These numbers relate to the current size of the Grinding stone, over time the stone will diminish in size and the reading will change. Determine the point at which the stone’s inner-face intersects the number grid and read off the corresponding number. Change the left-hand adjuster on the Angle Master to match this number.

The Angle Master - Part 2
Second, determine what angle you require your tool to be ground to, most scissors are set to an angle of 60 degrees. If you’re not sure, you can use the edge guides to measure the current angle of your tool. Once you have decided this angle, use the right-hand adjuster and select the number required.
Before the scissors have been inserted into the holder (see next page), place the flat face of the holder up against the plate and hold the black guides of the angle master against the edge of the grindstone. With the round, black guide touching the stone, move the flat guide to touch the scissor holder and then adjust the support plate using the locking wheel such that the flat guide and plate are contacting each other with no gaps. Your support plate will now be at 60 degrees.
Alternatively, you can add 10 degrees to the Angle Master (70 degrees instead of 60) and hold it up against the support plate without the scissor holder and adjust, this will take the 10 degree wedge of the support plate into consideration and can be easier to view from the side when adjusting the angle.

Scissor Holder
The scissor holder consists of a wedged plate (at 10 degrees) with two triangular clamps on one face. Loosen one of the clamps using the black wheel and insert the scissors so that, when the holder is placed on the support plated, the bevelled edge of the scissors faces towards the edge of the grindstone.
Ensure that the blade of the scissors is parallel with the edge of the clamp.

Sharpening your Scissors
With the scissors inserted into the holder, and the plate adjusted to the correct angle, you can now begin to sharpen your scissors.
Place the face of the holder against the support and lower it until the scissors begin to touch the grindstone. Gently move the scissors from side to side, following the curve of the blade such that as much of the edge is touching the stone at all times.
The tip of the scissors must be sharpened carefully, DO NOT dig the tip of the scissors into the stone, the stone is very fragile and damages easily.
Once your scissors are visibly and evenly sharpened, you may use the Dressing Stone to adjust the stone to a higher grit and improve the sharpness of the edge further.

Deburring
On the other side of the Tormek is a smaller leather wheel used to deburr your tools after sharpening and honing. This leather wheel can be used with or without the tools rest.
The leather wheel requires preparation and continual maintenance, light machine oil should be applied and allowed to soak in before applying a burnishing paste.
The tool should be placed flat against the edge of the wheel whilst running and then slowly pulled backwards and slowly angled tip down whilst the tip is in contact with the leather, repeat this process a couple of time and then flip the tool over and repeat until you can no longer feel the burr on the edge of the tool. Deburring methods can vary and many people will find alternative solutions to be just as effective.
