Thicknesser
Operation

Setup
Move the thicknesser into the workbench - 2 people required
Choose a spot on the workbench with enough space for the infeed and outfeed
Clamp the thicknesser to the workbench on both sides (The thicknesser is now mounted on a baseboard as seen to the right.  Not in all subsequent pictures though.)

Setup
Lower the infeed and outfeed tray
Attach the dust extraction connector to the thicknesser and the extraction hose on top of the workbench to it
Connect the power cord to the power socket suspended above the workbench
Turn on the shop extractor and open both the workbench extractor duct and the duct next to the extractor
Attaching the dust extraction port

Setup
Power socket
Dust Extraction
Open feed table

DH330 features
Final thickness stop
Depth of cut indicator
Planning thickness indicator

Planning thickness indicator
Indicator of the piece thickness after passing through the blades at the current height

A good rough indicator but not recommended for precision jobs, use at your own discretion

For a correct read the eyes need to be at the same level as the indicator


Final thickness stop
Locks the minimum thickness up to 8 different values - from 6 to 44mm

Values are shown in inches on the left side of the label

Useful for repeated runs with boards that must have the same thickness 





Depth of cut indicator
Indicates the thickness of the wood that is going to be removed on the next passage

A cut depth should never be higher than 0.5mm

To use it put the wood piece below the sensor (see picture) until it just touches.

Always check against the highest point of the board - if that’s not possible don’t rely on this feature




Sensor
Scale

First Passage
Unlock the height adjustment lever by moving it to the left.
Adjust the height lever until its close to the height of the wood piece - there should be a gap big enough to make sure that the first passage won’t touch any part of the piece.  You can also use the depth of cut indicator to keep it just above the piece of wood.
Lock the height adjustment lever by moving it to the right.
Put on your PPE. Turn the machine ON (green button). 
Feed the wood piece from the infeed table and let the machine drag the piece across to the outfeed table. Make sure the piece is always supported at entry and exit.

First Passage
(1) Unlock by moving left.
(2) Turn until it’s at the height of the piece to thickness
(4) Turn it on
(3) Lock by moving right
(5) Feed the piece until the rollers catch it (should be a few cm)
(6) Hold the piece on the way out and take it out only after all of it is on the outfeed table
(7) Turn it off

Next Passages
Turn the thicknesser off
Unlock the height adjustment lever by moving it to the left.
Lower the cut height - turn ¼ of the lever per passage (0.5mm)
Lock the height adjustment lever by moving it to the right.
Put on your PPE. 
Turn the thicknesser on.
Feed the wood piece from the from the front of the machine and hold it on the outfeed table


Final passage
Disconnect the machine from the power
Vacuum inside and around the machine.  You can also use the air compressor to clear out debris in the machine.  Make sure you turn off the air compressor.
Repeat the steps in “Setup” backwards
Empty the large particles bin in the extractor


Common Pitfalls
On the first pass, ensure the height adjustment setting is high enough for the whole board.  If a board is narrow at one end, it may jam as the thicknesser cuts towards the thick end.  Check the height of both sides.
Long boards will typically require two people to ensure the board is supported through input and output.  If you don’t support, it could topple the machine and will definitely push the board into the cutting blade causing uneven plane. 
If excessive saw dust is shooting out of the thicknesser, the dust extraction device is probably clogged.  Unplug the machine, remove the debris, and clear the extraction hose.


Tips & tricks
Once one side is flat make sure to change sides before getting too close to the final thickness
If your target thickness is lower than 5mm you can feed your thinner board on top of another wooden board
Cut with the grain to avoid tearout (see picture)
A thicknesser won’t correct any cups the wood might have as the pressure applied by the rollers will cancel the cup during the cut but it’ll spring back after








Other resources
Metabo DH330 manual
Metabo DH330 review
