Planer/Thicknesser
Online Training

Scope of the training
These online materials are designed to get you ready to operate the Makespace planer/thicknesser.
No prior knowledge of how to use a planer/thicknesser is assumed.
If you already know how to use a planer/thicknesser, this material has been designed to get you up to speed with this machine quickly. Please be patient with the process and if you have any tips to improve this guide, let us know!
This guide covers what all planer/thicknesser users need to know in Makespace.
Note: Somewhat confusing a planer/thicknesser is called jointer/planer in north America. This means that planing can refer to 2 different operations being performed depending where the author is located. Keep this in mind if you are watching youtube videos on its use.  

Learning objectives
How the planer/thicknesser works
How to use it safely
How to check the condition of the machine so it is safe and cuts well
What Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) is needed and why
How to inspect the planer/thicknesser before use
How to set up the planer/thicknesser to achieve a square board on all 4 sides
How to operate the planer/thicknesser
Cleaning-up up after use

This training material gives you a complete overview of the knowledge we expect all users to be familiar with.
It also gives tips and suggestions on how to get good results.
You need to complete the planer/thicknesser quiz, and the MakeSpace general safety quiz when ready.
Once you have passed the quizzes, you can arrange to have in-person assessment. Only once you have been shown person-to-person can you use the planer/thicknesser.
What you need to do 

planer/thicknesser
Safety 

Personal Protective Equipment
Risk of flying debris; Eye protection REQUIRED
Loud noise; Ear protection REQUIRED
Dust hazard; Dust dust mask recommended at all times and REQUIRED when cutting Irritant Wood 
Tangle hazard; Long hair MUST be tied back
Do not wear gloves. Tie back long hair.
No long sleeves, jewelry or dangling items

Safety Precautions
Caution: Sharp blade
Inform others in the workshop that they should also use PPE

planer/thicknesser safety: Setup
Before commencing any work with the machine, inspect it to ensure that it is complete and in technically good condition
Ensure the electrical isolation switch is turned off at all times except when cutting
Ensure that there is sufficient space to work around the machine;
Keep the work area orderly and clean. Components and tools that are not put in their correct place or put away may be the cause of accidents!
Do not use for workpieces that might contain foreign matter (nails, screws) 
Keep tools for handling short and narrow workpieces close at hand (e.g.: pushing stick, push blocks)

Planer safety: Permitted Operations
Only the following working techniques are permitted with the planer unit:
Planing the wide side of a single workpiece
Jointing the narrow side of a single workpiece    
All other working techniques, including the following, are absolutely forbidden:
Thicknessing several workpieces of varying thicknesses simultaneously 
Down-cut planing (direction of cutterblock rotation is the same as feed direction)
Insertion cuts (the workpiece is not worked over its entire length)
Planing workpieces that are very warped and cannot be balanced safely on planer tables      
Rabbet planing at the end of the cutterblock
Bevelling the narrow side of a single workpiece    
Chamfering the edges of a workpiece

Planer safety: Permitted Materials

Only solid timber can be used with this machine
Do not use boards shorter than 250mm
When surface planing do not use boards thicker than 75mm
Pieces longer than 1500mm aren’t safely supported by the tables alone and therefore can only be used with additional infeed and outfeed supports
The width of the board should not be over 310mm
The board should be no thinner than 10mm when using the machine as a planer as there is a risk for it to break/split while planing if depth of cut is too large 
The board should be no thinner than 4mm when the machine is used as a thicknesser
The workpiece should be no thicker than 250mm when the machine is used as a thicknesser
Man made boards such as plywood, MDF, chipboard must never be used
No metal or plastics are to be used with this machine 

Additional resources:

planer/thicknesser
Preparation, Set-up, and Operation


Power Connection
This machine uses 3 phase current, it is connected by the large red plug on the right hand end of the machine, which should be left connected.
There is a round red isolator switch which should be set to OFF except when running the machine.
There is a pair of red and green buttons on the front of the machine which stop and start the machine.

Preparing to use the planer - summary
Before powering the machine up ensure that:
There is sufficient unobstructed space to work around the machine.
The tables are empty. 
Check that the chip extraction system is connected, that the gates for the planer are open, that all other gates are closed and turn it on. 
Check that the overhead dust extractors are on, the remote controller lives in a pocket on the power sockets hanging over the workbench.
Check the combination fence is at 90 degrees, is set to the workpiece width and is locked.
Adjust the bridge guard approx. 2 mm above the workpiece;
Place the workpiece against the planer fence and push it slightly under the guard rail (not over the cutterblock!).
Loosen the clamping screw.
Move the guard rail right up to the planer fence.
Tighten the clamping screw.
Adjust the depth of cut to no more than 1mm.


Chip Extraction
Use of the chip extraction system is required for this equipment.
Make sure the blast shutter for all equipment being used is open and that all other blast shutters are closed.
Switch on the extraction system by pressing the green button, if the machine does not start check that the red stop button is not latched, twist ¼ turn to release it if necessary.
Remember to switch off when you are finished and if the bag is full please empty it.
There is no one to clear up after you except other members.


Overhead Dust Extraction
When doing anything which generates dust or chips, including any machine tool which requires chip extraction or hand sanding, the overhead dust extractors MUST be used.
This removes harmful dust from the air which would otherwise be breathed in by anyone in the secure workshop.
The remote controller for the overhead extractors lives in a pocket on the power sockets hanging over the workbench.
Press the ON/SPEED button once, check that both extractors start.
Remember to switch them off when you are finished.
If the sign on the extractors indicates that the filters need changing, please change them and update the sign. There is no one to do this for you except other members.

Adjusting the combination fence 
Unscrew the rear cutterblock cover 
Unscrew the planner fence locking bolt
Using both hands move the fence back/forth to match the width of your piece 
Tighten everything securely once finished

Check that fence is at 90 degrees to the table
Using an engineer square check that fence is at exact 90 degrees to the table
If an adjustment is needed release the lever at the back and tilt the fence until the desired angle is achieved

Adjust the bridge guard
Use the setscrew to fix the guard rail approx.  2 mm over the workpiece
Place the workpiece against the planer fence and push it slightly under the guard rail (not over the cutterblock!)
Move the guard rail right up to the planer fence
Tighten the clamping screw

Correctly adjusted bridge guard

Adjust the depth of cut
The depth of cut is adjusted with the adjustment lever on the feeder side of the planner table
Take firm hold of the lever and move it up/down until the desired value has been achieved on the scale
The picture shows a depth of 0.5mm
Note: The maximum depth of cut is directly related to the following factors:
Panel width 
Type of wood (hardwood or softwood)
Wood dampness
Feed rate     
For safety reasons never set this at more than 1mm (the first long line on the scale) at Makespace. 


Grain direction
When surface planing, you have to read the grain for the correct direction to feed the stock to avoid tear-out. 
As shown opposite feeding stock with the grain running "downhill" from the outfeed table and away from the knife's rotation produces the best results. 
If grain runs in several directions, position the board so that most of it runs in that direction. 
End grain should never be planed because the knives will shatter any unsupported portion of it.

Surface planing 
Once the above steps are completed you are ready to start surface planing
Surface planing evens out irregular workpiece surfaces
The workpieces are guided over the cutterblock and only their underside is machined
The direction of the cutter block rotation is opposite to the feed direction of the workpiece
Ensure the chip extractor and overhead dust extractors are on
Switch the isolator to ON and start the machine, do NOT switch the isolator to ON until you are ready to begin cutting.
Take the position shown in the opposite picture when working with the machine


Machining the workpiece
Use the push pads provided to hold the workpiece on infeed table
Push the workpiece straight over the feeder-side of the planer table.
As soon as possible, move one hand then the other to push on the workpiece on the receiver side of the planer table, without touching the bridge guard.
Repeat the process until you achieve a clean and flat wooden surface
Turn the machine off

Correct hands positioning. Fingers are place safely away from rotating cutters

Preparation for edge jointing 
Once you have achieved a clean and flat surface your next step will be to obtain a 90 flat edge in relation to it;
Check the planer fence is at 90 degrees if you haven’t done so
Adjust the bridge guard
Loosen the clamping screw.
Pull out the guard rail. (somewhat more than the width of the workpiece)
Place the workpiece against the planer fence and push it to the front edge of the feeder planer table (not over the cutterblock)
Bring the guard rail right up to the workpiece
Tighten the clamping screw.
Use the setscrew to lower the guard rail to the planer table
Clean and flat wood surface ready for edge jointing

Machining an edge 
Switch the machine on
Take up work position
With your left hand (using a push pad), press the previously machined surface against the combination fence and the receiver-side of the planer table
With your right hand (using a push pad), push the workpiece smoothly over the cutterblock
Continue the process until a perfectly 90 degree joint is achieved
Switch off the machine once you are done
Note: When edge jointing pressure should be placed so that the piece lays flat against the fence not the bed of the planer. Place fingers safely away from the planer table.

Preparation for thicknessing
Workpieces that already have a planed surface can be made thinner by being thicknessed. 
The workpiece lies with its planed surface on the thicknessing table, and only the upper side is machined.
Before being able to thickness pieces on the planer/thicknesser the machine needs to be retooled from a planer to a thicknesser 
Isolate the machine from the power supply
The machine needs to be pulled away from the workbenches behind to ensure there is enough clearance for the rear cutterblock cover to rotate 

Retooling from planer to thicknesser 
Ensure the power isolator is in the OFF position.
Move bridge guard out of the way and push the planer fence to the front of the table. 
Loosen and pull out the clamping levers
Open the planer table
Ensure that the fall lock engages correctly.
3
4
5
2
1

Retooling from planer to thicknesser 
Tilt up the vacuum hood taking hold of the extractor connector to avoid damage to the extraction pipe
Ensure the extraction hood slots into place correctly
Ensure the vacuum hose remains connected and it isn’t blocking the outfeed
Check the kick back guards are clean and are moving freely


Preparing to use the thicknesser
Once the previous steps have been completed the machine can now be used as a thicknesser;
Measure your piece at several points and take note of the highest value
Release the clamping lever by turning it anticlockwise
Adjust the thicknessing height to be <1mm below your highest measurement.    
Use the system handwheel to set the desired measurement, 1 full turn is equivalent to 2mm. 
Clamp the clamping lever by rotating it clockwise
Switch the machine on (and ensure dust extraction is on)
Lift and then release the gear lever

1
1
2
3/4
5
7

Machining the workpiece to final thickness
Take up work position for thicknessing
Place the workpiece so it lies with its planed surface on the thicknessing table;
Note the woodgrain and orient it so it is climbing away from the bed;
Push the workpiece into the machine until it is pulled in by the feed rollers;
When the workpiece exits on the other side, support it if needed so it does not tip down
Repeat adjustment steps 2-5 from the previous slide until you reach your desired final thickness, taking note not to remove more than 1mm with each pass
Switch off the machine
Set the gear lever to the “0” setting

2
3/4
5
7

Retooling from thicknesser to planer
Ensure the power isolator is OFF
Loosen the clamping lever by turning it anticlockwise
Using the system handwheel, position the thicknessing table at least 200 mm below the cutterblock
Tighten the clamping lever by turning it clockwise
Tilt the vacuum hood downwards to the the left  side until it rests in place.
Release the fall lock and tilt the planer tables to you
Once table is down and engaged press the clamping levers inwards and lock it in place

Cleaning up after use 
Makespace is a shared community space with no paid staff, that means it is your responsibility to keep the space clean 
Ensure that machine is left in a safe state with all guards in place and the mains isolator OFF
Turn off the chip and dust extractors.
Vacuum any wood chips that may have escaped the extraction system on the planer tables, thicknessing bed
Move the machine back so it is tight against the workbench behind and out of the way of other users 
Vacuum any chips that were previously covered by the machine 

Recap
We have covered:
Required PPE when using the machine
Permitted operations and materials when using the machine 
How to safely setup the workspace before using the machine 
How to setup and use the machine in planer mode to machine a reference surface and reference edge
How to retool the machine from planer to thicknesser
How to setup and safely use the thicknesser 
How to retool the machine from thicknesser to planer 
How to clean the workspace once you have finished using the machine 
