Thicknesser
Cribnote Slides (courtesy of Michael Dales)

What is Thicknesser Used For ?
It is used to trim boards to a consistent thickness along their length and to make them flat on both surfaces, with the surfaces parallel to each other.
Has rotating blades that plane the wood and takes off thin layers on each pass
Great for getting new seasoned wood ready for working


What material is the Thicknesser suitable for ?
Clean, natural wood in plank form from a known source and free of foreign objects such as nails and screws (old pre-used wood) or stones (rough felled wood or tree trunks)
Do not put random logs or branches of wood through the thicknesser.  They need to be roughly flat already.
NO MDF, chipboard, particleboard, etc. 
NO palette wood, old bits of furniture or boards that may have metal in them
Minimum target thickness should be a few mm 


Where Does It Live ?
It lives to the right of the storage bench near where the Compressor, the Shop-VAC and the Bandsaw are.
It’s on a wheeled trolley and pulls out easily.  Lifting it onto the workbench needs two people do not try lift it on your own
Use of extraction with the thicknesse is mandatory.  The 100mm ectraction pipe is suspended over the workbench.
The Thicknesser Manual is on the wiki and linked off this course.


A Tour of the Thicknesser
The front and back fold down sides to support the material on entrance and exit
The handle on the top moves the middle section up and down
Full turn is 2mm
For each pass use a maximum of 1/4 turn	(0.5mm)


The thicknesser works by using a set of spring-loaded rollers to push the wood past a rapidly rotating drum
NEVER put your hands near this part of the machine unless the power cable is unplugged from the mains.   NEVER touch this drum or the blades;  or try repair a fault here!
The drum has two full width blades that  plane the top-side of the wood being cut.

operators need to understand:
Two rollers used to guide material and feed it through in one
direction only
Drum with blades on - so only cuts on top side
A Tour of the Thicknesser (2)
