CNC Router Operation
Setting up CNC equipment   
Set up the CNC
Create the Tool path 
Cut the workpiece  
Clean up   

Secure workpiece to the bed
Position the work on the bed

Screw the work to the bed
Use the screws which can be found bowl at the front of the  router bed.
Measure the screw placement to ensure the screws are out of the tool path. 
Ensure the screws are positioned so that the all material pieces will still be held securely even after the cut.
Measure the thickness of the material
Confirm it is consistent with your cut depths. 
Cuts should not penetrate into the bed more than 0.5 mm 
If necessary, modify the tool path file to be consistent with the actual depth of the material 




Power
Machine Setup
Turn the Power on at mains socket on wall
(Note that the Power to the cutting bit spindle is not powered at this point, it will be turned on just prior to cutting.)
Ensure the Emergency stop is out and not activated. 
The stop is on the front of the router case, next to the spindle speed control. It should be pulled out and free to move  

Cooling - Confirm cooling water is flowing
Above the spindle housing there are several tubes carrying water to to the spindle motor .
The green rotor can be seen moving in a steady rotation when water is flowing. If the water is not flowing, do not continue and report this to maintenance?


Setup
When the power is turned on the pendant will boot. Once it is booted the screen will be flashing red

Press the RESET button to activate the pendant and clear the previous job.




Mounting the Cutter
Move spindle to front of bed and high enough to be accessible 
use "Y " 2 or 8  key to move to/from operator end of bed
use "X "  4 or 6  key to move right/left side of bed
use "Z"  1  or 9  key to move Up/down

Select the tool (bit) as specified in the tool path file
Confirm the tool diameter with calipers 
Choose a collet from rack
Use the Imperial sized collets for ⅛” (3.175mm)¼” (6.35mm) & ½” (12.7mm) cutters




Mounting the Cutter
Select the correct ER Collet
Test the cutter in the selected collet.  
It must be an easy press fit.  Do not force fit.
Remove the cutter from the collet.
Do NOT attempt to fit collet into the nut with the cutter in the collet!




Mounting the Nut, Collet and Cutter
Remove nut from the spindle (it should be loose and no tools are needed at this stage)
Clip the collet into the nut from the reverse side of the nut
Insert the tool to ⅓ of its length into the collet
Place the collet, nut and tool on/into the spindle.  Finger tighten the nut.
Turn spindle to confirm that the tool is centred and not bent. 
Use the wrenches hanging on the wall to tighten the spindle nut 
Tighten using single hand  to grip both wrenches

Mounting the Cutting Tool into the Router Spindle
Always clip the collet into the nut before inserting the cutter or attaching the nut to the spindle.
Never attach the collet/nut without first clipping the collet into the nut.


Failing to do this will result in the tool being off-center and may result in the cutter slipping out of the collet while operating.

Setting the Origin  

Set XY Origin
Ensure the bed is clear of all objects and tools
Position tool over the Origin for the workpiece using the pendant 
use "Y " 2 and 8  key to move to/from operator end of bed
use "X "  4 and 6  key to move right/left side of bed
The Origin is where the tool will start when cutting the tool path
Set  XY Origin by pressing XY -> 0  (clear XY axis to zero)
Ok to confirm   ( OK button is below the 3) 
The values of x and Y on the screen should read 0.00


Set Z Origin
Remove the sensor from the spindle housing 
Place Sensor on workpiece directly below spindle and tool 
Press <Advanced>  button (blue on left) on the pendant
A new menu will appear 
Select <Probe> on menu
Confirm ok
Probe will move down and contact surface (Z is now set) 
Have your finger ready to press <pause > in case the probe doesn't retract 
Probe will retract to safe height after it touches the surface of the sensor
Return the sensor to the spindle housing
Be careful to not snag the sensor wire on the spindle hood  
The tool should be above the workpiece at the start position for the cut 
