Woodworking handtools
Safety 

How to use a woodworking handtools safely
The woodworking hand tools are much safer than their counterpart power tools
We take them for granted, but almost everyone in the woodworking trade has been hurt by a hand tool. 
Most injuries would be minor, but they can cause quite serious injuries, such as the loss of a finger or an eye.
Users must be reasonably competent before using tools, so as to not put themselves or others at risk of injury (nor ruin the tool or the workpiece by improper use)
This course will not train you to do beautiful work with tools, (you will do that with loads of practice), but it will explain the issues around their use –which will give you the best chance of developing your woodworking skills safely.


Identifying ways the tools can injure you or
others
Tool
Potential risk
How/why they can injure
Saws, knives, chisels, marking gauge
Can cut, scratch or gouge you
Wrong tool; pushing/striking too hard; unstable workpiece; wet or blunt tool; using incorrectly;damaged tool; user not concentrating
Hammers and mallets 
Can bruise, can hit you with fragments
Hitting metal with metal; wrong tool; unstable workpiece; wet or blunt tool; using incorrectly; damaged tool; user not concentrating

Personal Protective Equipment
No PPE equipment is mandatory when using the handtools 
Consider using a dust mask and/or gloves when dealing with exotic wood species or treated wood
Consider using eye protection when using chisels 
Consider using safety boots, specially when dealing with large pieces of timber 
 

Woodworking tools safety: General rules 

Keep tools in good condition
Use the correct tools for the job
Know how to properly operate tools before using them
Stay focused 
Store tools safely where they can’t fall and injure you or others 
Ensure your working area is safe (check next slide)
Inspect the tools before use (check next slides)

Woodworking tools safety: Safe working area 

Before you proceed to use any tools check that you have a safe working area:
Is there sufficient space to work safely 
Is there sufficient light to work safely without potentially damaging the work piece or the tool
Is the work area floor wet, slippery or uneven? Are there any potential trip hazards?
If working on a table or bench, is it stable? Is the piece secured to the bench?  
Have your warned other workshop users about the work that is being carried out? 

Woodworking tools safety: Inspect the tools 
Never use a tool for which you have no knowledge how it operates and its intended use. When in doubt ask, don’t proceed thinking it will be ok. More details on using individual tools are provided in the next chapter.   
Before you use any of tools the following checklist should be observed:
Are any parts of the tool missing?
Is it rusty or seized up? 
Are any blades or teeth damaged, blunt or loose?
Is the handle or head loose or damaged?
Are any other parts of the tool damaged or loose?

When dealing with rough sawn wood use gloves to avoid splinters;
Never secure the piece you are working using your hands only;
Never place your hands on the path of the tool;
Never use blunt tools, they are dangerous as they require excessive force to make them cut;
Ensure there are no nails or other metal fasteners on the workpiece, retailers often use metal staples to secure labels;
Use tools properly; learn to use them with skill and don’t be afraid to ask for help. 


Woodworking hand tools safety: Additional checks & tips
