Woodworking Hand Tools 
Preparation, Set-up, and Operation



Woodworking hand planes

A handplane is a tool for shaping wood 
Generally, one would use a hand plane to flatten or reduce the thickness of wood.
In addition to the above, they are also used to impart a smooth surface onto the wood. A sharp hand plane and some knowledge about the grain of the wood could help you achieve an extremely smooth finish which may not require any sanding.
There are various types of hand planes, some of which are: 
Bench plane
Plough plane
Router plane
Skew rabbet plane
Shoulder plane 

Hand planes - Components

A hand plane is made of 
Blade / Iron – The steel blade which cuts the wood.
Chip breaker – Supports the blade and cuts wood chips as they pass through the mouth.
Lever cap – Secures the chip breaker and the blade firmly to the frog.
Sole – The bottom face of the plane.
Frog – An adjustable iron wedge that holds the plane iron at the proper angle and allows it to be varied in depth relative to the sole.
Adjustment knob - Used to advance and retract the blade in order to control the depth of cut.

1
2
5
4
It may be hard to spot the chip breaker in a picture like this one. Here, it is the flat, silver/grey piece sandwiched between the blade and brass lever cap on top.
3

Woodworking hand planes
We’ll now look at each of the hand planes in depth –
Bench plane
Plough plane
Router plane
Skew rabbet plane


Bench planes
The “standard” type of hand plane. They are characterized by having their cutting bevel facing down and attached to a chipbreaker. They are primarily used to flatten and smoothen wood surfaces.
As a woodworker, you will find that these planes are indispensable for any kind of joinery you may want to do.
No. 7 Jointer plane
Has a long sole. Used for jointing and final flattening out of boards.
No. 5½ Jack plane
Flattening rough surfaces with more finesse and accuracy than a scrub plane.
No. 4 Smoothing plane
Smoothens the surface and prepares it for finishing. Notice the very short sole.

Setup and use a handplane 

Plough Plane
Plough planes are used to make grooves in the wood. They are also known as grooving planes or plow planes.
The distinctive features of a plough planes is that they have a shoulder and and a very narrow blade.
The shoulder helps with making a straight groove as it references the nearest, planed edge of the wood that you have prepared.

Shoulder

Router Plane
Router planes are used to cut a surface parallel to its sole. More simply, you use a planed face (not an edge) of wood as your reference surface, and adjust the depth of the blade to cut a hole/groove/shape such that the bottom face of the recess is parallel to the face of the wood. 
Besides the uses shown in the pictures below, router planes are used to trim tenon cheeks, create hinge mortises, refine grooves, etc.
Router plane blades are often difficult to sharpen so they are normally only used to refine the cut left by a different tool 

Skew Rabbet Plane
Skew Rabbet Plane are a type of Rabbet Planes, typically characterised by having their blade protrude a very tiny bit outside the edge of the plane. This allows for sharp, clean cuts of rabbets and cleaning of shoulders. A Skew Rabbet Plane additionally has the blade placed at an angle (see 1) to make the job easier to do. Optionally, a smaller blade may exist in front of the main blade to score the wood to avoid tear-outs when cutting across the grain (see 2).
2
1

How to setup and use the plough and router plane

Woodworking chisels - introduction

A wood chisel is basically a sharp angled piece of steel with a handle. 
It’s impossible to make fine furniture without at least one good wood chisel.
Woodworking chisels are used for so many different steps in making wood joints. 
The main types of woodworking chisels are Bench chisels, Mortise Chisels and Paring Chisels
Bench chisels are multi-purpose woodworking chisels that are used for chopping and paring the wood. Bench chisels can be shaped as bevel edge, firmer, or registered. 
Also spelled “mortice chisel”, these chisels are used for heavy chopping of mortises. Common types of mortise chisels include “Sash” Mortise Chisels, “Pig Sticker” Mortise Chisels, and “Registered” Mortise Chisels 
Paring chisels are more delicate chisels used for paring, or careful slicing of the wood. Paring chisels have thinner steel and are usually sharpened with a low angle to aid in paring end-grain and other difficult grain. Paring chisels should never be struck with a mallet, but only used with the hands. 

Woodworking chisels - makespace chisels

Makespace has a set of 5 Lie Nielsen bevel edge chisels which can be used for paring or light chopping of wood. 
These are available in 1/4" (~6mm), 3/8" (~9.5mm), 1/2" (~13mm), 3/4" (~19mm) and 1" (~25mm) 
There is also a couple of Lie Nielsen mortice chisels (Not yet available as they are out of production)
Available in 1/4" (~6mm) and 3/8" (~9.5mm)
You are expected to sharpen them as you use them and this will covered on the practical assessment
Chisels backs have been flattened by Makespace maintainers and you should not redo them 

Woodworking chisels - Bevel chisels


Woodworking chisels - Mortice chisels 


Woodworking chisels - tips and tricks


Woodworking Saws - Saw Types

Panel Saws
Joinery Saws
Western Saw
Japanese Saw
Coping Saw




Intended Use
Cutting large boards into smaller components prior to planning
Trimming lengths of wood and cutting joints

Fine joinery and making flush-cuts
Cutting curved shapes and commonly used for removing waste material when cutting dovetails
Design Features
Handles usually closed. Blades often narrower above the cutting edge to avoid jamming in the kerf. Usually <10 PPI
Pistol-grip handle. Western saws usually feature a thick spine at the top of the blade to keep the blade strength and add weight to the blade. Usually around 15-25 PPI depending on saw type
Usually made with thinner blades than Western saws, with finely set teeth resulting in a narrow kerf.  
Narrow blade and deep frame.Narrow blade held under tension and adjusted with the screw adjuster. Blades often around 15-17 PPI and are replaced when they break or start to blunt. 
Teeth (more info on next slide)
Crosscut or Rip 
Crosscut or Rip
Crosscut or Rip
Blade dependent
Kerf Size
Wide
Medium
Thin
Thin
Cutting Direction
Push Stroke
Push Stroke
Pull Stroke
Blade dependent

GRAIN DIRECTION
DIRECTION OF CUT
Woodworking Saws - Crosscut and Ripsaw

Crosscut teeth
Crosscut teeth are designed to cut across the grain
Examples:
sawing a plank to a desired length
sawing shoulders for a tenon
making the cuts for a cross halving joint

Cut Direction:





Teeth Shape:
Rip teeth
Rip teeth designed to cut with or along the grain.
Examples:
sawing a plank to a desired width
sawing down tails and pins for dovetail joints
sawing down cheeks of a tenon

Cut Direction:









Teeth Shape:

GRAIN DIRECTION
DIRECTION OF CUT

Woodworking Saws - Using Handsaws

Woodworking marking tools 
Woodworking marking tools allow you to measure and mark your work precisely.
The tools available in the woodshop include:
Steel rulers
Squares
Sliding bevel
Wheel marking gauges
Dividers
Pencils and marking knives; 
The next few slides introduce some of these tools.

Marking tools - Square and sliding bevel
Used to make marks square to an edge or check the squareness of different faces.
Can also be used to mark a 45-degree angle.


Also known as a T-bevel or false square.
The sliding T bevel can set any angle and transfer it onto another piece.



Marking tools - Wheel marking gauges
Provides highly accurate lines.
Can be used with both pull or push strokes. 
Place the index finger on the stem while the thumb and middle finger remain behind the fence.
Do multiple passes, increasing the pressure each time.

Marking tools - dividers
Used to mark out various types of woodworking joints.
Used for layout, providing consistent distances, and comparing gaps and openings.
The points can be used to mark wood.

Recap of the training
We have covered:
Setting and using handplanes 
Handsaw selection and use 
Marking tools selection and use 

