Circular Saw Induction Training


Circular Saw
Training 1: Starting and Finishing Work

Personal Protection
Goggles are required.
Non safety glasses are usually made from brittle material and may not protect you from flying shrapnel.
Other people working in the workshop space should also have eye protection and hearing protection if you are using this equipment.
Dust is hazardous so wear a face mask, if cutting MDF or other especially toxic woods
Hearing protection is required.
Remove dangling clothing and jewellery. Tie back long hair



Setting Up to Use the Circular Saw
The circular saw is a portable saw so uses any standard 13A wall socket. These can be found around the perimeter of the makespace workshop or in the power cube suspended above the main central workbench
Check that there is enough length of power cable to reach right to the end of your work area. Consider an extension lead if required.(reaching the end of the cable while making a cut is not safe and very frustrating…)

Managing Dust
The Makespace circular saw is not fitted with an extraction port for the shop extractor system, but it can be connected to the portable shop vacuum
Since the saw will only usually produce small amounts of fairly coarse dust, use of the extraction system is optional when making a small number of cuts
However, if using the saw for extended periods, on hazardous material, or when the workshop is busy, vacuum extraction is highly encouraged
As mentioned before, consider personal dust masks, particularly for MDF and other especially toxic dusts. 

Anatomy of the Circular Saw - Overview
Bevel angle screw
Blade guard
Blade
Blade securing screw (do not adjust)
Trigger
Front handle
(non-dominant hand)
Rear handle (dominant hand)
Depth adjustment setting
Trigger enable
Blade guard manual release handle
Fence Slot

Inspect the saw
Ensure the saw is not plugged in
Firstly inspect the power cable for cuts, nicks, kinks or frayed ends.
Move on to checking the main plastic housing for any cracks, loose screws etc
Next check that the blade guard moves freely and returns home properly
If there are any problems do not use the saw and inform the owners
Blade guard

Inspection - Blade
Check that the blade:
Is installed the right way round (the teeth should point upward at the front of the saw)
Has all its teeth intact
Feels secure, with the retaining screw tight
Check that the riving knife is in place and is straight

Correct way round
Riving knife
