Mitre Saw
Safety 

How to use a mitre saw safely

Personal Protective Equipment
Safety glasses are mandatory
Hearing protection is mandatory
Dust mask recommended. Mandatory if cutting irritant woods and MDF
Do not wear gloves when operating the band saw

Mitre saw safety features
Blade Guard
Power trigger
Blade arm release trigger
Fence
Built-in clamps

Mitre saw safety: Setup
Unplug machine or turn off the wall socket before making adjustments to the saw.
Check to make sure the saw table and surrounding area is clean and free of debris.
No loose clothing, no ties, no lanyards, no gloves. Tie back long hair.
Plan your cut to minimize chances of kickback or offcuts being thrown by the blade. (Will items will jam against the fence or be drawn through the gap in it? Consider cutting with a handsaw if you cannot cut safely with the mitre saw.)
When cutting mitres or bevels, ensure fence is clear of the blade (Do a “test run” without power to check where the blade will pass.)
Check the correct blade is installed for your material.


Mitre saw safety: Operation
Plug in machine or turn on wall socket.
Check blade is rotating freely when power on.
Stand with legs apart, close to the machine. Can use left or right hand to operate saw, free hand to stabilize workpiece. 
Keep hands away from cutting area. Use clamps when appropriate.
Wait for the blade to stop spinning before lifting it out of workpiece.
Turn the machine off when done cutting.
Leave workspace clean & clear.
If the blade breaks or teeth come off, turn off the machine, make a notice informing others it is out of action and contact workshop@makespace.org


Ensure long pieces of timber are supported so they do not fall off table after being cut.
When cutting small offcuts, consider using a backer board to prevent offcuts from bouncing around and potentially being thrown by blade. (example video)
When cutting a small or irregularly shaped workpiece, use a jig to secure the piece. This will keep your fingers away from the blade and ensure the blade doesn’t throw loose pieces through the workshop. Consider using a handsaw if power mitre saw not necessary.

Mitre saw safety: Additional checks & tips
Use a safety jig to hold small or irregularly shaped workpieces

Resources:
For more safety details read the Mitre Saw Risk Assessment
Evolution Rage3 DB user manual
Makespace wiki pages
